Balancing Producer Fairness and Efficiency via Prior-Weighted Rating System
Design
Thomas Ma1 , Michael S. Bernstein2 , Ramesh Johari2 and Nikhil Garg3

arXiv:2207.04369v6 [stat.AP] 11 Apr 2025

1

MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142
2
Stanford University, School of Engineering
475 Via Ortega
Stanford, California 94305
3
Cornell Tech
2 W Loop Road
New York, New York 10044
thoma98@mit.edu, msb@cs.stanford.edu, rjohari@stanford.edu, ngarg@cornell.edu
Abstract
Online marketplaces use rating systems to promote the discovery of high-quality products. However, these systems also
lead to high variance in producers’ economic outcomes: a
new producer who sells high-quality items, may unluckily receive a low rating early, severely impacting their future popularity. We investigate the design of rating systems that balance
the goals of identifying high-quality products (“efficiency”)
and minimizing the variance in outcomes of producers of similar quality (individual “producer fairness”).
We show that there is a trade-off between these two goals:
rating systems that promote efficiency are necessarily less individually fair to producers. We introduce prior-weighted rating systems as an approach to managing this trade-off. Informally, the system we propose sets a system-wide prior for
the quality of an incoming product; subsequently, the system updates that prior to a posterior for each product’s quality based on user-generated ratings over time. We show theoretically that in markets where products accrue reviews at
an equal rate, the strength of the rating system’s prior determines the operating point on the identified trade-off: the
stronger the prior, the more the marketplace discounts early
ratings data (increasing individual fairness), but the slower
the platform is in learning about true item quality (so efficiency suffers). We further analyze this trade-off in a responsive market where customers make decisions based on historical ratings. Through calibrated simulations in 19 different real-world datasets sourced from large online platforms,
we show that the choice of prior strength mediates the same
efficiency-consistency trade-off in this setting. Overall, we
demonstrate that by tuning the prior as a design choice in
a prior-weighted rating system, platforms can be intentional
about the balance between efficiency and producer fairness.

1

Introduction

Rating systems that capture user (consumer) feedback, such
as thumbs-up or five-star ratings, are central to online platforms. These ratings influence consumer choices, which in
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

turn drive creator (producer) outcomes ranging from virality to economic opportunity. Given the consequential nature
of these rating systems on platforms and on producers, are
there better—and worse—ways to design them? We study
the impact of the design of these rating systems on producers’ welfare. Conditional on item quality, ratings and reviews may be noisy or depend on factors outside the producer’s control (Salganik, Dodds, and Watts 2006). This
variance in ratings translates into a substantial variance in
producer experiences on platforms, especially early on in
a producer’s tenure: for example, on eBay, a seller’s first
negative rating is associated with a substantial drop in that
seller’s growth rate on the platform (Cabral and Hortacsu
2010). Neglecting this variance in producers’ economic experience is detrimental to the market: in online labor marketplaces, many highly effective workers are underutilized
simply due to a lack of previous experience on the platform
(Pallais 2014). We view this variance in producer outcomes
as a form of individual producer unfairness: conditional on
true producer quality, outcomes may differ substantially between producers. On the other hand, platforms try to simultaneously learn about products considered to be high quality
by consumers, to match consumers to as many high-quality
products as possible. We refer to this goal of optimizing for
consumer experience as efficiency.
The preceding discussion suggests that a trade-off exists between consumer experience (efficiency) and producer
variance (unfairness). One intuitive way to think about this
trade-off is to broadly think of rating systems as Bayesian
updaters: The estimated quality for a product in the system is the platform’s posterior estimate of the quality given
the historical user ratings. In this view, the choice of prior
strength has a first-order impact on both the experience of
consumers and the variance in producer outcomes. A high
prior strength leads to smaller posterior updates, making it
difficult for user reviews to affect the rating. This minimizes
the influence noisy ratings have on outcomes for producers
of similar true quality, but makes products with few reviews
all look similar, regardless of their actual quality. On the

taken from real-world online marketplaces (Gao et al. 2022;
Wan and McAuley 2018; Wan et al. 2019; Hou et al. 2024).
In both models, we find that the prior strength determines
the platform’s operating point on this trade-off curve, and
that this finding is robust across datasets and model details;
as an example, Figure 1 demonstrates how this trade-off consistently arises in the responsive setting when we run simulations on ratings data from the book-recommendation site
Goodreads.
1e6

Expected Total Regret (Consumer Inefficiency)

other hand, a zero prior strength yields a posterior estimate
that is the simple sample mean of user reviews. This helps
higher-quality products quickly achieve more visibility, but
the noisy procedure of review generation induces high variance in producer experiences.
This view captures the dynamics of rating systems used in
production by many large online platforms. Most platforms
that choose to publicly disclose their ratings aggregation
method simply calculate the sample mean of reviews that
are deemed sufficiently recent or trustworthy, such as in the
case of Uber (Uber 2024), Yelp (Zukin 2024), and Etsy (Etsy
2024), which is analagous to setting the prior strength of the
distribution in our Bayesian updater to zero. Other platforms
are cognizant of issues such as reputation inflation, and take
a weighted average of a product’s sample mean rating with a
fixed value (usually the average rating across all products).
This method, known as Dirichlet ratings (Zhang et al. 2011),
was formerly used by IMDb’s movie rating system (IMDb
2019) and is currently used by MyAnimeList (MyAnimeList
2024), and is equivalent to the higher prior strength case in
our Bayesian updater. An overview of the rating systems of
some common online platforms is found in Appendix D.
Thus, whether they know it or not, many platforms have
implicitly made a choice about how much they value consumer experience over producer fairness, with the majority
of platforms today choosing to set that strength to zero and
use the sample mean. We argue that platforms should be intentional about design choices like these, given the importance of providing high-quality experiences to consumers
and of giving fair treatment to producers. We show that platforms control this efficiency-fairness trade-off through their
choice of system design; i.e., the prior strength they use implements their “operating point” with respect to this tradeoff. As a consequence, our work suggests that characterizing
these operating points is of first-order importance to platform design.
In this paper, we formalize our Bayesian metaphor by
defining and analyzing a family of prior-weighted rating
systems, where a platform’s rating system calculates the estimated quality of each product on the platform as per the
Bayesian updater described above. We frame selecting the
Bayesian prior in this in this system as a design choice, determining how changing this prior influences consumer efficiency and producer fairness using both theoretical analysis
and calibrated simulations using extensive real ratings data.
We first analyze a stylized fixed model in which all products accumulate ratings at a uniform rate. We characterize
the efficiency-fairness trade-off as a bias-variance trade-off
on the mean squared error of product quality estimation; we
theoretically prove that the prior strength determines the operating point on the trade-off curve.
We then consider a responsive model, where higherquality products receive more attention over time. We formalize the efficiency-fairness trade-off using standard consumer and producer welfare metrics: efficiency depends on
whether consumers receive high-quality items, and fairness
on whether products of the same underlying true quality receive similar attention.
We run calibrated simulations using data from 19 datasets

Dataset
children
comics graphic
fantasy paranormal
history biography
mystery thriller crime
poetry
romance
young adult
Prior Strength
0.001
1
10
100
1000
10000

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
Standard Deviation of Selection Rate (Producer Unfairness)

Figure 1: Producer unfairness1 versus consumer inefficiency
Pareto curve, parameterized by prior strength, for responsive model experiments with Goodreads ratings. The prior
strength determines the trade-off between fairness and efficiency. Different colors represent different Goodreads
datasets, which are stratified by book genre. An in-depth explanation of the fairness and efficiency metrics is given in
Section 2.3, while the experimental setup that generated this
particular graph is given in Appendix E.
Across these evaluations, we observe that even a minor
modification from the sample mean status quo can make the
system much fairer for producers. In our responsive model,
there are datasets for which moving from a “sample mean”
rating system that places zero weight on a prior to one that
places minimal weight in the prior reduces producer unfairness by 30% while only decreasing match efficiency by
10%. Many platforms today have implicitly made an extreme choice for their prior weight by using the sample mean
of ratings. Thus, between the extremes of using the sample
mean and ignoring user ratings completely, there lay designs
that largely distinguish products by their true quality while
still empirically producing fair outcomes on the market.

2

Model and Data

We first describe our model and formally define priorweighted rating systems within our model. We then intro-

duce the two model variants we analyze: the fixed model
assumes that all products accrue ratings at the same rate,
and changing the prior does not impact how the collection
of user-generated feedback evolves, while the responsive
model relaxes this assumption by modeling consumers as
noisily seeking the best product on the market. We define
metrics for producer fairness and efficiency for each model.
Though the model detailed here assumes a ratings system
with binary reviews, our model extends readily to ordinal
reviews as well (see Appendix E).

2.1

Beta-Bernoulli setting, this posterior distribution for product
v at timestep t is a Beta distribution with parameters
α = α̂ + R(v, t),
β = β̂ + (|S(v, t)| − R(v, t)),
where R(v, t) ∼ Binomial(t, qv ) is the number of positive
ratings received by the item so far (and so |S(v, t)| − R(v, t)
is the number of negative ratings). We can compute the posterior mean estimated quality for product v at timestep t as:

Model Primitives

Our modeling framework is as follows.
Products. There is a universe of products V . Product v ∈
V has unobserved true quality qv , where 0 ≤ qv ≤ 1.
Binary ratings that accumulate over time. Products accumulate ratings over time, as users interact with and rate
products. To capture this phenomenon, we assume the market operates over discrete time periods t, and products can
receive ratings at each time period. We assume these ratings
are binary, i.e., 0 or 1.
Crucially, the true quality of a product should impact the
rating received; we suppose that a rating for product v is
Bernoulli(qv ), independent of all other randomness in the
system. Since ratings accumulate, we use S(v, T ) to denote
the set of binary ratings that product v ∈ V has received
after T timesteps have elapsed.
We assume binary ratings as a simplification for ease of
exposition; our results qualitatively extend to other settings,
as we demonstrate in Appendix E. We note that this choice
captures how many platforms elicit ratings (e.g., in any platform that uses a thumbs-up/thumbs-down system); in other
platforms with more than two options, ratings often follow a
“J-curve” where users mostly only use the extreme options
(Hu, Zhang, and Pavlou 2009). In Appendix G, we demonstrate that our results hold even when we assume users’ distribution over ratings is centered or even right-skewed.
Prior-Weighted Rating System. In a prior-weighted rating system, the prior distribution is a design choice of the
platform. The system operates by estimating a posterior distribution of the estimated true quality for each product, given
the prior and the received ratings on that product.
We primarily consider rating systems where the prior represents a Beta distribution.1 Then, in this setting, the platform chooses the prior Beta distribution parameters (α̂, β̂).2
We will refer to α̂ + β̂ as the prior strength, as it indicates
how strongly the prior is concentrated around its mean (and
how many ratings will be needed to “overwhelm”) the prior.
After a product receives a rating, the platform updates its
estimation posterior distribution for its true quality. In our
1
This choice is natural, given that ratings are assumed to be
Bernoulli. The Beta distribution is the conjugate prior for Bernoulli
data, i.e., with this choice of prior, the posterior distribution remains a Beta distribution but with different parameters.
2
α
In a Beta(α, β) distribution, the mean is α+β
; the higher that
α + β are, the more concentrated the distribution around the mean.
A common interpretation of the parameters is that α+β is the number of trials (coin flips), and α represents the number of successes.

q̂α̂,β̂ (v, t) =

α̂ + R(v, t)
α̂ + β̂ + |S(v, t)|

.

(1)

The platform impacts the operation of a prior-weighted
rating system only through the prior choice, determined here
by α̂ and β̂. There are two aspects of this choice: the shape
of the prior, and its strength relative to observed ratings in
determining the posterior. In our analysis, we fix the prior
shape by relying on market-level data, in a manner inspired
by empirical Bayesian statistical methods (Robbins 1964).
Our analysis shows that the strength of the prior then mediates the tradeoff between efficiency and producer fairness.
Formally, to reason about a prior’s strength, we fix a prior
shape (α̃, β̃), then set (α̂, β̂) = (η α̃, η β̃) for some prior
strength η ≥ 0, providing us with a single-parameter lever
to adjust the strength of the prior. We elaborate on how we
calibrate the prior shape in Section 3.2. Note in particular
that if η = 0, then the platform simply implements sample
averaging to compute the estimated quality of an item.

2.2

Fixed and Responsive Models

We study two models for how customers may interact with
items, and items accumulate ratings over time. We begin
with a fixed model in which the products receive ratings at
the same rate, regardless of their past ratings. We then study
a (more realistic) responsive model in which products with
higher estimated ratings receive ratings more often.
Fixed model. In the fixed setting, all products stay in the
market for the entire time horizon, and each product v ∈ V
accumulates one rating at each timestep t. In this model, the
platform eventually accurately learns the true quality of all
products, but has noisy estimates for each finite time t.
Responsive model. The responsive model differs from
the fixed model in two ways: (1) items enter and exit the
marketplace over time; (2) items are more likely to receive
ratings if they have a higher estimated quality in the rating
system. These changes in the responsive model capture selection effects (Acemoglu et al. 2022), in which consumers
may react to previous ratings, more often choosing to interact with (and thus rate) items with more positive ratings in
the past; these effects are not present in the fixed model.
At each timestep t, only a subset M (t) ⊆ V of the products is available for purchase. A single consumer chooses
a single product v(t) to purchase and provides a rating on
that product, and at the end of the timestep, each product
v ∈ M (t) exits the marketplace with some uniform, exogenous probability and is replaced by another product not
currently in the market. The customer choice will depend

on historical ratings for each available item. In our analysis in Section 4, we will instantiate consumers as Thompson
samplers, as well as those that sample uniformly from the k
items with the highest estimated ratings.

2.3

Efficiency and Producer Fairness Metrics

We now develop metrics that capture the two qualitative objectives described above: efficiency, and producer fairness.
Informally, efficiency is measured by whether or not the rating system is successfully identifying high-quality products.
Individual producer fairness is measured by whether products of similar true quality are treated similarly.
Metrics in fixed setting. In the fixed model, we focus
primarily on an accuracy measure: the mean-squared error
(MSE) of the estimated quality in predicting true quality,
defined at timestep t as
P
M SE(q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ ) =

2
v∈V (q̂η α̃,η β̃ (v, t) − qv )

|V |

.

(2)

Why MSE? Via the bias-variance decomposition, meansquared error encodes a metric for efficiency and a metric
for producer unfairness. For product v with true quality qv :

2
E[(q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t) − qv )2 |qv ] = E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] − qv
+ Var[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ].
(3)
When conditioned on a product with given true quality
qv , the variance component of the MSE (second component
on the right-hand side) represents an objective for producer
fairness, as the estimator should ideally estimate products
of similar true quality similarly, even if that estimated quality is biased. The bias component of MSE is correlated with
consumer efficiency; in particular, a rating system that consistently underrates high-quality products or overrates lowquality ones will lead to poor consumer experiences.
Metrics in responsive setting. In the responsive setting,
because consumers choose (and rate) higher rated items at
higher probabilities, we base our metrics directly off of how
often products are selected. We define lv to be the lifespan
of a product v in the responsive model. The selection rate
of a product v as the fraction of times that it was rated (and
thus the fraction of times the product was purchased) during
its lifespan, SR(v) := |S(v, t)|/lv .
Efficiency. Formally, to measure efficiency, we use total
expected regret compared to the best item in the marketplace
at each time step:

E

" T
X
t=1

#
max {qv } − qv(t) .

v∈M (t)

(4)

Low regret corresponds to high selection rates for high
quality products, while ensuring sufficient exploration of
low quality products. In real markets, this arises naturally
from rating products according to the sample mean, meaning lower prior weights should increase efficiency.

Fairness. To capture variance conditional on quality, our
chosen fairness metric is the standard deviation in selection rate given true quality. This individual fairness notion
is conditional on quality: items of similar quality ought to
be picked at similar rates. Let σ̂(U ) be the sample standard
deviation computed on a set of real-valued numbers U . For a
fixed true quality q, the individual (un)fairness metric is the
standard deviation in selection rate conditioned on an item
being of that true quality:
σ̂ ({SR(v)|qv = q}) .

(5)

To get a marketplace-level metric of producer unfairness,
we take the expectation of eq. (5) over true qualities q.
We do not use a statistical measure as in the fixed setting for two reasons: (1) The responsive model allows for
more direct capture of real-world welfare metrics, and (2)
as products are sampled adaptively, quality estimation will
inherently be negatively biased (Nie et al. 2018), making
mean-squared prediction error a poor metric.

2.4

Datasets

As a part of the empirics of our paper, we run calibrated
simulations on a total of 19 real-world datasets.
The dataset we rely primarily on is KuaiRec (Gao et al.
2022).3 KuaiRec provides a dense matrix of user-item interactions on a large video-sharing platform where every user
has a watchtime percentage for every video, allowing us to
base our simulations on data that is free of selection bias.
To convert watchtime into a binary rating, we assume a user
liked a video if they watched 40% or more of it, then took the
mean like ratio of each product v to calculate its true quality
qv . We choose this threshold because it yields a left-tailed
true quality distribution with a mean quality of 0.79, which
resembles a typical market with ratings inflation (Garg and
Johari 2021; Horton and Golden 2015). (We study the robustness with respect to this threshold in Appendix G.)
In the responsive setting, besides KuaiRec, we also run
our simulations using ordinal (non-binary) data taken from
18 datasets containing rating data from the online bookrecommendation platform Goodreads (Wan et al. 2019; Wan
and McAuley 2018), as well as Amazon.com (Hou et al.
2024). Appendix E explains in more detail how we used
these datasets in our experiments.

3

The Efficiency-Fairness Tradeoff in the
Fixed Model

We first analyze the fixed model, in which all products accrue ratings at the same rate. This fixed model illustrates our
main ideas in a simple setting. We analyze the trade-off in
producer fairness and efficiency through the lens of a familiar objective in machine learning: minimizing mean-squared
error (MSE) in predicting true product quality. We show theoretically that an efficiency-fairness trade-off is ensured in
this setting as a consequence of the bias-variance decomposition of MSE in eq. (3). We then illustrate our theoretical
results through calibrated simulation.
3
Licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution Share
Alike 4.0 International License

3.1

Theoretical Analysis

We present two theorems that characterize the efficiencyfairness trade-off in our fixed model, where efficiency and
fairness are defined through the bias-variance decomposition of mean-squared prediction error as given in Equation
3; proofs of both theorems are available in Appendix A.
The first theorem establishes that as the prior strength η increases, efficiency decreases but fairness increases:
Theorem 3.1. Suppose we have a prior-weighted rating system in the fixed setting with prior parameters (η α̃, η β̃). Fix
product v with true quality qv and consider quality estimation after t timesteps.
Then, as η
≥ 0 increases, (1) squared bias

2
E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] − qv
is nondecreasing; (2) variance Var[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] is strictly decreasing in η.
Theorem 3.1 establishes the trade-off between fairness
and efficiency. As the prior strength of a prior-weighted rating system increases, it is less likely for two identical products to be rated differently, reducing variance while increasing estimation bias.
The above theorem characterizes error for a given quality
level qv as prior strength changes. We are also interested in
how the true quality of the product influences the efficiency
and fairness metric, i.e., how the platform estimates quality
for different true quality levels. An ideal statistical estimator
for quality should have low MSE across all quality levels.
Our next theorem characterizes how efficiency and unfairness vary with true product quality:
Theorem 3.2. Suppose we have a prior-weighted rating system in the fixed setting with prior parameters (η α̃, η β̃). Consider quality estimation after t timesteps.
Then, as a function of true product quality, squared bias

2
E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] − qv
is convex with a global miniα̃
mum at α̃+
, while variance Var[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] is concave
β̃
with a global maximum at 1/2.

Theorem 3.2 illustrates which products would be favored
by increasing η; in the sample mean setting where η = 0 and
the unfairness objective is high, producers of middling true
quality have the most variance. This is due to the variance
for Bernoulli distributions being highest when the mean is
around 1/2. As η increases, the estimated quality of products
α̃
not close to α̃+
becomes systematically biased, as the prior
β̃
moves estimated quality of items toward the prior mean.
Thus, products above this value systematically are underestimated, and products below this value are over-estimated,
α̃
reducing efficiency. Note that if the prior mean α̃+
is caliβ̃
brated (via a method such as empirical Bayes, which we use
in our application below), then this value will correspond to
the average product quality.
A key takeaway of this theorem is that the efficiency and
producer unfairness metrics as a function of product quality
have different shapes; as changes in η prioritize one metric
over the other, different groups of producers will benefit in
terms of both efficiency and fairness.

3.2

Empirical Setup

We simulate an idealized marketplace using the KuaiRec
dataset, using these simulations to illustrate our fixed model
theory. In the next section, we will reuse this framework
to simulate the responsive model, evaluating how different
prior-weighted rating systems might perform in a setting
closer to practice. A supplement to our paper containing
code, and step-by-step instructions on replicating our experiments, is attached in the submission.
Model calibration. To pick a prior shape (α̃, β̃), we make
use of the empirical Bayes (EB) method (Robbins 1964),
which provides an approach for computing an estimate of
prior parameters across a population. We perform a 60-40
train-test split on the products in the our dataset. We use all
available ratings data for products in the training set to calibrate (α̃, β̃) using EB. The remaining 1,331 products (in the
test set) are the universe of products V on which the simulation is run. We are interested in investigating how ratings
in the marketplace change over time, so our marketplace is
simulated over time; we fix a finite time horizon T , and at
each timestep t, either draw one review for all v ∈ V in the
fixed model, or draw one review for the specific v ∈ V chosen by the consumer at timestep t in the responsive model.
Fixed model parameters. We set a time horizon of T =
50, and run our simulations for four different values of
η ∈ {0, 1, 10, 1000}. The first two η values correspond to
prior-weighted rating systems under the sample mean estimator and the baseline empirical Bayes (EB) estimator respectively. η = 10 corresponds to a setting where the prior
is difficult to overcome in early timesteps, but eventually is
shifted significantly by ratings data. η = 1000 corresponds
to a setting where the posterior is essentially equal to the
prior throughout the entire simulation, i.e., ratings data is
ignored. We ran all of our experiments (for both the fixed
and responsive models) on an internally-provided computing cluster, where the compute power required for our simulations was negligible.

3.3

Empirical Results for Fixed Model

Illustrating the efficiency-fairness trade-off across different values of η. Overall, our simulations illustrate the theoretical results. Figure 2 plots the estimation MSE as a function of producer true quality, for different levels of η and
number of timesteps elapsed t. Note the shift from concavity
to convexity as η increases – the system shifts from where
producer unfairness is the primary contributor to MSE to
one in which consumer inefficiency is the main contributor. Figure 9 in Appendix B shows the same phenomenon in
estimated versus true quality; low values of η induce high
variance in estimation, while high values of η induce a systematic bias into the rating system that underestimates highquality products and overestimates low-quality ones. Further, by varying prior strength, we can recover both the sample mean estimator where ratings are determined entirely by
user reviews, and a “static” estimator where no amount of
data will change a market’s initial assessment of an item.
The market designer can thus interpolate between these two
extremes by adjusting η, adjusting the efficiency and pro-

η=0

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Binned True Quality

Binned True Quality

η = 10

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Binned True Quality
1

η = 100

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

MSE

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

η=1

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

MSE

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Binned True Quality

Elapsed Timesteps t
3
10

50

1

Figure 2: Lineplot representing MSE of different quality estimators in the fixed setting, stratified on true product quality. With few ratings, lower-decile products incur higher
MSE with the EB estimator but higher-decile products incur
higher error with the sample mean estimator. Note that as η
increases, the MSE as a function of quality goes from concave, indicating error predominantly comes from variance,
to convex, indicating error comes predominantly from bias.
ducer fairness induced by their rating system. Supplemental visualizations showing how varying η impacts aggregate
MSE across all products are shown in Appendix B.
No value of η is ideal for all products. Our theory and
simulations for the fixed model also reveal that there is no
estimator in our design space that performs best for all product quality levels in settings with low numbers of reviews;
setting low values of η ensures that high-quality and lowquality products are accurately identified and treated as such,
but induces variance in estimation on products of medium
quality. On the other hand, high values of η ensure accurate estimation only for products with true qualities close to
α̃
. This suggests that an “ideal” design that maximizes
α̃+β̃
efficiency and producer fairness cannot be obtained in the
fixed model; improving outcomes on one group of products
must inherently hurt outcomes for another group.

4

Responsive Model

We now analyze the responsive model described in Section
2. This model adds two practical aspects of real-world markets: (1) products stochastically enter and exit, leading to a
marketplace where the product offerings change over time
and in which the platform is always learning about new
products; (2) consumers are more likely to purchase items
that have previously received higher ratings. Our responsive
model thus resembles a multi-armed bandit with dynamically changing arms and a fixed sampling algorithm, where
the market designer influences the information seen by the
sampling algorithm. This section is organized as follows. We

first outline how we implement simulations for the responsive model, and then investigate how tuning prior strength
affects the producer fairness and match quality metrics. We
conclude with a discussion of results, and compare our simulation outcomes with those from the fixed model.

4.1

Responsive Model Implementation

Here, we describe our simulation implementation of the responsive model. (Note that, as discussed in Section 2.3, the
changes in the responsive setting make quality estimation
inherently biased, complicating the theory developed in the
fixed setting; Appendix C demonstrates the dependency of
bias and variance on the exact dynamics of the sampling
algorithm used for consumer choice in this setting.) An
overview of the responsive model’s design and metrics for
efficiency and fairness are provided in Section 2.
Users adaptively choose products on the market. At
each timestep t, a subset of the products M (t) ⊆ V is available for purchase. A single user interacts with a single item
at each timestep, making their choice as a function of past
ratings. In particular, in the main text, we model this user as
a Thompson sampler that utilizes the posterior quality distribution for each item. That is, for each v ∈ M (t), the consumer draws a sample xv ∼ Beta(α̂+R(v, t), β̂+|S(v, t)|−
R(v, t)), and then chooses and rates the product v(t) that
maximizes xv .4 Thompson sampling is a well-studied algorithm for trading off between exploitation and exploration
in multi-armed bandit problems (Russo et al. 2018). Prior
work has also argued that it serves as a reasonable approximation of real-world consumer choice; for example, Krafft
et al. (2021) demonstrate that when individual human decisions are aggregated together in consumer financial markets, the behavior is remarkably close to that of a distributed
Thompson sampling setting.
Although we present our results for Thompson sampling
in the main text, we also consider other models to ensure robustness. In particular, in Appendix F, we consider variants
in which the consumer choice method varies in its effectiveness at selecting the best-quality product in the market.
Rating posterior update. As before, the chosen product
v(t) ∈ M (t) receives feedback drawn from a distribution
based on its true quality. In the main text, we primarily consider binary ratings drawn from a Bernoulli(qv(t) ) distribution. Using the binary feedback, the Beta distribution associated with it is updated accordingly. We further consider
ordinal ratings drawn from a Multinomial distribution, updating a Dirichlet prior, in Appendix E.
Dynamic product entry and exit. Products enter and exit
the marketplace over time, to reflect reality in which real
platforms are always in “cold start” with some new products. After an item is chosen and rated at each timestep, each
product in the market v ∈ M (t) independently has some exogenous probability ρ of leaving, and being replaced by a
product not in M (t). Let L(t) be the set of products that exit
the market at time t; a set of products of size |L(t)| is drawn
uniformly at random without replacement from V \ M (t)
to replace the products in L(t). When a product enters the
4

With ties broken uniformly at random.

4.2

Empirical Results for Responsive Model

We run simulations across 19 datasets and several customer
choice models. For ease of exposition, in the main text we
primarily focus on the KuaiRec dataset and prior shape calibrations from the fixed setting, detailed in Section 3.2. In
Appendix E, we demonstrate what happens when we run our
simulations on ordinal ratings data rather than binary ratings
by trying 18 different datasets from ratings data collected
from Goodreads and Amazon. Appendix F showcases results from making the consumer choice model, described in
the next paragraph, less sensitive to estimated product quality, and Appendix G details empirical results when the underlying quality distribution of the dataset changes. We find
that the results are robust to various real-world settings.
Prior strength trades off average quality of product
sampled with consistency of outcomes for products. As
with the fixed model, our results show trade-offs in producer
fairness and match quality by varying η (Figures 1 and 3).
With the sample mean estimator, regret (our measure of efficiency) is minimized, but the variance in the percentage of
the time a product is purchased while in the market (producer unfairness) is extremely high. Increasing η improves
the consistency of producer outcomes, but strictly increases
regret, with η = 1000 giving maximal aggregate producer
fairness while greatly decreasing overall match quality, almost tripling the total regret. We further note that one can
substantially reduce producer variance (unfairness) without
substantial losses in efficiency, by moving from η = 0 to
η = 1 or η = 10. As before, by changing a single parameter
in the ratings design, a market designer can interpolate between a market that solely optimizes for consumer efficiency
5

A Beta(0,0) distribution is not well-defined; in actuality, for
the η = 0 case, we set η to 0.001. For ease of exposition, we round
down and refer to this case as the η = 0 case.

500000
450000
Expected Total Regret

marketplace, it is treated as a new product with zero ratings,
even if it had previously been in the market.
Marketplace calibration. We use the same 60-40 product train-test split as in the fixed model simulations, using
the training set to calibrate the EB prior as before, and set
the market size |M (t)| to be 5 for all timesteps, with a replacement probability of ρ = 0.01, meaning products will,
on average, receive 100 reviews before exiting the market.
Because not every product will be in the market at the same
time, and only one product is bought at each timestep, we
set a time horizon of T = 5,000,000 to make sure enough
reviews are generated for each product. For computational
efficiency, we further pare down the number of products in
the test set: we generate V by resampling 25 products, taking from the test set the xth percentile products by quality,
where x ∈ {0, 4, 8, 12, 16...96}.
Prior strength η. Our focus is on investigating how the
prior strength impacts outcomes. We run simulations with a
range η ∈ {0, 1, 10, 50, 100, 500, 1000}.5 η = 0 and η = 1
correspond to the sample mean and empirical Bayes (EB)
estimator respectively, and η = 1000 corresponds to ratings
having little impact on estimated quality. The remaining values interpolate between these extremes.

η = 1000
η = 500

400000
350000
300000

η = 100
η = 50

250000
200000

η = 10
η=1

η=0

0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200 0.225
Standard Deviation of Selection Rate
1
Figure 3: Scatterplot of average
standard deviation in selection rate versus total expected regret for responsive setting with the KuaiRec dataset for different prior strengths η.
Here, η = 0 represents the sample mean estimator, η = 1
represents the empirical Bayes (EB) estimator. Increasing η
improves the consistency of producer outcomes, but strictly
increases regret.

to one that solely optimizes for producer fairness.
Improving producer fairness for high-quality products decreases overall match quality. Next, we disaggregate producer fairness across true product quality. Figure 4
demonstrates how the variance in outcomes is distributed
across true quality quartiles for different prior strengths.
When η is 0 or 1 (low prior strength), the mean selection rate
for low-quality products is consistently low. On the other
hand, high-quality products are on average picked more, but
there is substantial variance in the selection rate (high unfairness). As η increases, high-quality products are more consistently sampled (lower variance), but so are products of other
qualities, and the selection rate is similar across products.
We further investigate the analog to Theorems 3.1 and 3.2:
how bias and variance vary with the choice of prior. We separate out products by true quality decile, then, within each
decile, compute variance in selection rate as our surrogate
variance measure. For a measure of bias, for each η value
and each decile, we take the squared difference of the selection rate in that decile with the selection rate of that decile
in the sample mean (η = 0) setting. Figure 5 shows the results of these calculations; we find that our theoretical results conceptually hold in the responsive setting. Variance is
concave in true quality and decreases as η increases, while
bias is convex in true quality and increases as η increases.
These results indicate that as in the fixed setting, low values
of η cause high producer unfairness for good products, while
high values of η are inefficient because they overly promote
lower-quality products. Across both settings, making sure all
products receive similar outcomes as each other comes at a
cost of also sustaining low-quality items – as, with a small
number of ratings, many low- and high-quality items seem

Variance in Selection Rate

Squared Difference in Selection Rate
Compared to Sample Mean System

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
True Quality Decile
0

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

Prior Strength η
1
100
1

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
True Quality Decile
1000

Figure 5: Lineplot of variance in selection rate and squared
difference in selection rate from the sample mean for the
responsive setting with KuaiRec, stratified by true quality
decile of product. Variance in selection rate is concave and
decreases at all levels as prior strength η increases, while the
squared difference in selection rate is convex and becomes
more pronounced as η increases.

0.4

Prior Strength η
0
1
10
1000

0.3

0.2

0.1

1

1.0

1

Figure 4: Violin plot of selection rate for products in the
responsive setting with KuaiRec, faceted by prior strength
η and stratified on true quality quartile. White dots represent the mean selection rate for each group. At low values of
η, low-quality products consistently get low exposure while
high-quality products are popular in expectation, but have
high variance in outcome. At high values of η, all products
are consistently purchased at the same rates.

0.00

Mean Play Ratio After 4th Play

1.0

0.8
0.8

Selection Rate SR(v)

1.0

Selection Rate SR(v)

0.8

4

0.6

4

0.4

3

0.0

3

1.0

2

0.8

2

0.2

η = 1000
1

0.6

0.6

Selection Rate SR(v)

η = 100
1

0.4

0.4

Selection Rate SR(v)

0.0

4

1.0

4

0.8

3

0.6

2

3

0.4

2

0.2

1

0.2

η = 50

1

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.6

Selection Rate SR(v)

η = 10

0.0

True Quality Quartile

Selection Rate SR(v)

0.4

4

0.2

4

0.0

3

0.8

3

0.4

2

0.2

1

2

0.0

True Quality Quartile

η=1

1

0.0

True Quality Quartile

η=0

2
3
Number of Likes After 4 Plays

4

1
Figure 6: Lineplot for the responsive
model with KuaiRec
showing expected future selection rate for products in the
highest true quality quartile after 4 buys, conditioned on how
many of the first 4 buys were likes, plotted for several values
of prior strength η. At low values of η, products that received
more likes early have a much higher mean selection rate than
products that received more dislikes early, despite all products in this quartile having similar quality; at high values of
η, this difference vanishes.

identical to the platform and users.
However, there is a key difference caused by the shift
to the responsive model; variance is now highest for highquality products, especially for small η. We view this effect
as a result of “rich-get-richer” effects in systems where users
make decisions based on prior ratings.
Increasing prior strength mitigates rich-get-richer effects. Finally, the results illustrate that higher prior weights
can mediate popularity bias. We measured products in the
top quartile of true quality within V that stayed in the market
long enough to be purchased 4 or more times.6 We display
the mean selection rate of these products conditional on the
value of η and their number of likes in the first 4 purchases.
For low values of η, early performance has significant consequences on future popularity, with the mean selection rate
for the 4-likes group being more than six times that of the 1like group when η = 1. As η increases, the number of likes
achieved early on has fewer consequences for future exposure; the mean selection rate for all groups is roughly 0.19
when η = 1000. Our results are illustrated in Figure 6.
This demonstrates a phenomenon of most real-world marketplaces, not captured by the fixed model: when ratings
have a large impact on estimated quality, early popularity for
a product snowballs product demand, even if other products
that did not get popular early are of higher quality. Increasing the prior strength mitigates snowball effects, as stronger
6

Note that because the qualities of all products in this quartile
are in the same very high range (between 0.92 and 0.95), no products got 0 likes in the first 4 purchases.

priors require more evidence from early reviews that a product is truly high-quality. Mitigating the effect induces its
own trade-off: Figure 4 shows that for high η values, lucky
breaks in popularity for products happen less, but it also
takes more evidence for the system to identify a truly lowquality product as such, replacing the loss in producer fairness from rich-get-richer effects with a loss in match quality.

5
5.1

Discussion

Implications for Market Designers

Sample mean rating systems can be made much fairer
with only a slight loss of efficiency. Our primary contribution is the design and analysis of a specific class of
prior-weighted rating systems that allows market designers
to trade off across variance in producer outcomes and average match quality. The class is parameterized via the choice
of prior, which is then updated with data via Bayesian updating. We find that by fixing the shape of the prior and varying the strength, the prior-weighted rating system can characterize many different rating systems, including the commonly used sample mean estimator. By doing so, we find
that the sample mean represents an extreme point in the design space where individual fairness is not prioritized at all;
even weighting the sample mean by a small fixed value can
increase producer fairness by 30%, while negligibly decreasing consumer efficiency. We note that increased producer
fairness in online platforms can even garner long-term efficiency benefits, as the market becomes more attractive for
producers (Pallais 2014; Huttenlocher et al. 2023).
Consider individual fairness of producers as a design
goal. Equitable treatment of producers is often not considered in market design settings; there is no a priori reason
to desire equal outcomes from producers that vary wildly in
their abilities. Our definitions of producer fairness are built
around a notion of individual fairness; producers of differing abilities may be treated differently, but those with similar
skills ought to be treated similarly. Our work juxtaposes producer fairness with notions of consumer efficiency, and advocates for market designers to consider producer fairness
as an objective in its own regard to be designed for, rather
than as an impediment to market efficiency.

5.2

Future Directions

Strategic considerations. We have not considered strategic
behavior of market participants in the presence of a priorweighted rating system, on either the user or producer side.
On the user side, users may choose not to leave ratings
(Tadelis 2016) or leave fake ratings to boost specific producers (Hu et al. 2012; Golrezaei et al. 2021). There may further
be limits to how much the platform can vary the prior, as
users are likely to respond strategically by ignoring ratings
information if they are obviously uninformative. In particular, users who behave according to rational expectations theory may attempt to “correct” quality estimates and impose
their own priors, as opposed to using the platform-provided
estimates to make choices. More generally, we do not explicitly consider user interface considerations for how such
systems can be presented to users.

On the producer side, the choice to enter or exit the marketplace is strategic and may depend on the system design
(Vellodi 2018). There may further be considerations in what
products to produce, as a function of economic rewards the
platform provides (Jagadeesan, Garg, and Steinhardt 2022).
We believe modeling these strategic considerations is an
important direction of future research. We expect that even
in the presence of these strategic considerations, the same
tradeoff between efficiency and producer fairness is likely
to be salient for system design; said differently, while we
expect strategic considerations to impact the choice of priorweighted system, we expect that its role in mediating the
efficiency-fairness tradeoff is robust.
Real-world considerations. As noted in our model development, we have simplified and abstracted away from
many of the complex dynamics of real marketplaces. First,
we only consider binary and ordinal ratings, whereas in
real-world systems, ratings may be an aggregate of several different categories (e.g., shipping speed, seller communication, etc.). Constructing prior-weighted rating systems
for these platforms would require higher-dimensional priors
than the ones considered here. Nevertheless, we expect the
same qualitative impact of prior strength to apply. Second,
we have not considered heterogeneity in producers across
the marketplace; in practice, a prior would likely need to
account for producer covariates that describe distinguishing
features, like product category. Finally, while we have compared against sample mean rating systems, some platforms
in practice will use more complex machine-learning models
to determine the displayed ratings. We anticipate a generalization of our theoretical work to still apply to machine
learning-powered rating systems: broadly speaking, every
rating system has a “dynamic” component that updates a
product’s rating based on the reviews it accrues over time,
and a “static” component that evaluates the product even
when it has no reviews, which is analogous to the role of
prior strength in a prior-weighted rating system. As such,
comparing such “black box” rating systems with the more
transparent prior-weighted rating system design proposed
here remains an interesting direction for future work.
Further theoretical analysis. Our current theoretical
analysis considers the efficiency-fairness trade-off in the
fixed model; we rely on empirics to show an equivalent
trade-off in the responsive model. Theoretical results for
the responsive model would further support existence of our
efficiency-fairness trade-off in a setting that is much closer
to how real-world marketplaces operate. As we detail in Appendix C, theoretical analysis of the responsive model requires characterizing the number of plays an item of quality
qv receives as a function of the prior strength η and its (finite)
lifetime. Such an analysis is challenging given the dynamic
and endogenous nature of this quantity (e.g., the expected
rate at which an item of age 10 is pulled depends on realizations of the ratings up to that point), and we leave such
analysis for future work. A theoretical analysis could also
incorporate strategic user behaviour or consider dynamically
altering the prior strength η, rather than using one value for
the entire time horizon for each producer.

6
6.1

Related Work

Variance in Producer Outcomes

Substantial work has shown that online marketplaces driven
by user feedback increase the volatility of producer outcomes. Salganik, Dodds, and Watts (2006) demonstrate, in
an artificial music recommendation marketplace, that letting
users see feedback about how often other users downloaded
songs greatly increased the unpredictability of how often
songs were downloaded. On eBay, Cabral and Hortacsu
(2010) demonstrate that the very first negative review received by a product substantially decreases a seller’s growth
rate by 13%, and increases the likelihood they receive further negative reviews. One reason for such variance is ratings inflation (Filippas, Horton, and Golden 2018; Horton
and Golden 2015; Zervas, Proserpio, and Byers 2021; Hu,
Zhang, and Pavlou 2009), where, in practice, ratings are observed to be extremely high on average; such inflation magnifies the importance of any single negative rating.
The recommender systems literature considers variance
in producer outcomes through the lens of popularity bias,
where popular items are recommended frequently but niche
items that are potentially of high value to customers are
rarely recommended (Abdollahpouri 2019; Elahi et al.
2021). Vellodi (2018) creates a model marketplace where
ratings drive exposure for firms who face entry and exit decisions. Variance in the treatment of firms has a detrimental
effect on overall market efficiency due to barriers in entry;
firms that are truly high-quality may be priced out of the
market by a lack of reviews, while lower-quality firms that
did get noticed stay in the market. Chen et al. (2022) frame
popularity bias in the terms of fair assortment planning in
assortment optimization. Interventions to mitigate popularity bias take the form of different recommendation algorithms that leverage techniques such as reweighting (Abdollahpouri, Burke, and Mobasher 2019) or causal methods
(Wei et al. 2021). Metrics for success in mitigating popularity bias are usually based on how often the recommender
suggests products in the “long tail” of exposure while still
achieving high recommendation accuracy.
A commonality in these works is that producer variance
is undesirable – it leads to high-quality products being frequently underexposed, or lower-quality products remaining
on the platform. We consider rating system design to reduce
this variance, viewed through the lens of individual fairness.

6.2

Other Interventions in Rating Systems

Other works have developed solutions to tackle uninformative ratings and producer unfairness. Garg and Johari (2019,
2021) and Shahout et al. (2023) consider changing the user
interface to deflate the distribution of ratings. Other proposed solutions include aligning rater incentives (Gaikwad
et al. 2016; Cabral and Li 2015; Fradkin and Holtz 2022).
These change how ratings are produced by customers after
a purchase, a process we assume is fixed.
Other works, like ours, seek to modify how the platform
learns from ratings and, in turn, what it shows users. Acemoglu et al. (2022) consider learning in the presence of
selection effects of who leaves ratings, informing the de-

sign choice of rating systems that either show the full history of ratings to customers or just their summary statistics. Papanastasiou, Bimpikis, and Savva (2018) utilize a
Beta-Bernoulli model similar to our binary ratings setting to
demonstrate that strategic obfuscation of prior ratings information about a product can actually improve consumer surplus. Perhaps the work closest to ours is Vellodi (2018), who
considers “upper censorship” of ratings shown to customers,
to mitigate barriers to entry caused by long-lived producers
with many ratings. In contrast, we seek to balance producer
fairness and consumer efficiency caused by ratings variance,
and provide a class of system designs for this trade-off.
Finally, a large literature explores fair recommendation
and ranking approaches, by instead changing which items
are shown and in what order (Asudeh et al. 2019; Patro et al.
2022; Singh and Joachims 2018; Wang and Joachims 2023;
Zehlike, Yang, and Stoyanovich 2022).

6.3

Fairness and Incentivizing Exploration in
Multi-Armed Bandits

We conceptually view rating system design (in particular,
how the platform learns quality estimates from ratings data)
as one trading off “fairness” (reducing individual producer
variance) and efficiency (helping customers find higherquality items). This view connects our work to the idea of
exploration vs exploitation in multi-armed bandits; in particular, we cast consumers as playing the role of regretminimizing agents who are given a set of products to choose
from, based on information provided by the recommendation system. Producer fairness then relates to ideas in fairness in bandits; Joseph et al. (2016) formulate the notion
that lower-quality arms should not be favored over higherquality ones, and Liu et al. (2017); Wang et al. (2021) that
consistency-optimizing definitions where similar individuals should be rewarded similarly. Interventions in these settings involve creating novel sampling algorithms; in contrast, our model holds fixed consumer behavior and focuses
on modifications to the underlying rating system.
A particular subfield of interest within the multi-armed
bandits literature is the literature on incentivizing exploration (Slivkins 2021), where a principal communicates
messages to agents who choose their own actions from
among the arms presented to them based on that information. Objectives in this paradigm include maximizing reward
despite overly myopic agents by encouraging those agents to
explore more (Frazier et al. 2014; Immorlica et al. 2018), or
ensuring that all options in the space are explored at least
once (Sellke and Slivkins 2021; Simchowitz and Slivkins
2021). Our work views increasing exploration not as an instrumental goal to increase the platform’s information about
product quality, or greater match quality, but as a pathway to
increasing producer fairness. In this way, our paper presents
insights about market design that complement objectives in
the incentivizing exploration literature.

7

Conclusion

While rating aggregation is often viewed as a fairly unremarkable aspect of platform design, it is extremely conse-

quential for the producer experience. A single early bad rating can make it impossible for a product to recover, while
early successes can fuel a rise. We propose that marketplaces
ought to engineer these rating systems purposefully, in particular, to control the tradeoff between these fairness considerations and the consumer experience. We demonstrate
through a prior-weighted rating system that the choice of
prior can strike a balance between these competing goals.

References
Abdollahpouri, H. 2019. Popularity bias in ranking and recommendation. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 529–530.
Abdollahpouri, H.; Burke, R.; and Mobasher, B. 2019. Managing popularity bias in recommender systems with personalized re-ranking. In The thirty-second international flairs
conference.
Acemoglu, D.; Makhdoumi, A.; Malekian, A.; and
Ozdaglar, A. 2022. Learning from reviews: The selection
effect and the speed of learning. Econometrica, 90(6): 2857–
2899.
Amazon.
2024.
Understanding
Customer
Reviews
and
Ratings.
https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?n
odeId=G8UYX7LALQC8V9KA. Accessed: 2024-01-08.
Asudeh, A.; Jagadish, H. V.; Stoyanovich, J.; and Das, G.
2019. Designing Fair Ranking Schemes. In Proceedings of
the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data,
SIGMOD ’19, 1259–1276. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450356435.
Cabral, L.; and Hortacsu, A. 2010. The dynamics of seller
reputation: Evidence from eBay. The Journal of Industrial
Economics, 58(1): 54–78.
Cabral, L.; and Li, L. 2015. A dollar for your thoughts:
Feedback-conditional rebates on eBay. Management Science, 61(9): 2052–2063.
Chen, Q.; Golrezaei, N.; Susan, F.; and Baskoro, E. 2022.
Fair assortment planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07341.
Elahi, M.; Kholgh, D. K.; Kiarostami, M. S.; Saghari, S.;
Rad, S. P.; and Tkalčič, M. 2021. Investigating the impact of
recommender systems on user-based and item-based popularity bias. Information Processing & Management, 58(5):
102655.
Etsy. 2024.
How the Review System Works
for
Sellers.
https://help.etsy.com/hc/enus/articles/360000572708-How-the-Review-SystemWorks-for-Sellers?segment=selling. Accessed: 2024-01-08.
Filippas, A.; Horton, J. J.; and Golden, J. 2018. Reputation
inflation. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on
Economics and Computation, 483–484.
Fradkin, A.; and Holtz, D. 2022. Do incentives to review help the market? Evidence from a field experiment on
Airbnb. American Economic Review: Insights.
Frazier, P.; Kempe, D.; Kleinberg, J.; and Kleinberg, R.
2014. Incentivizing exploration. In Proceedings of the fifteenth ACM conference on Economics and computation, 5–
22.

Gaikwad, S. N. S.; Morina, D.; Ginzberg, A.; Mullings, C.;
Goyal, S.; Gamage, D.; Diemert, C.; Burton, M.; Zhou, S.;
Whiting, M.; et al. 2016. Boomerang: Rebounding the consequences of reputation feedback on crowdsourcing platforms. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology, 625–637.
Gao, C.; Li, S.; Lei, W.; Chen, J.; Li, B.; Jiang, P.; He, X.;
Mao, J.; and Chua, T.-S. 2022. KuaiRec: A Fully-observed
Dataset and Insights for Evaluating Recommender Systems.
In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM ’22.
Garg, N.; and Johari, R. 2019. Designing optimal binary
rating systems. In The 22nd International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 1930–1939. PMLR.
Garg, N.; and Johari, R. 2021. Designing informative rating
systems: Evidence from an online labor market. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 23(3): 589–605.
Golrezaei, N.; Manshadi, V.; Schneider, J.; and Sekar, S.
2021. Learning product rankings robust to fake users. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics
and Computation, 560–561.
Horton, J.; and Golden, J. 2015. Reputation inflation in an
online marketplace. New York I, 1.
Hou, Y.; Li, J.; He, Z.; Yan, A.; Chen, X.; and McAuley, J.
2024. Bridging Language and Items for Retrieval and Recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03952.
Hu, N.; Bose, I.; Koh, N. S.; and Liu, L. 2012. Manipulation
of online reviews: An analysis of ratings, readability, and
sentiments. Decision support systems, 52(3): 674–684.
Hu, N.; Zhang, J.; and Pavlou, P. A. 2009. Overcoming the
J-shaped distribution of product reviews. Communications
of the ACM, 52(10): 144–147.
Huttenlocher, D.; Li, H.; Lyu, L.; Ozdaglar, A.; and Siderius,
J. 2023. Matching of Users and Creators in Two-Sided Markets with Departures. arXiv:2401.00313.
IMDb.
2019.
IMDb
Help
Center.
https://web.archive.org/web/20191106153526/https://help.i
mdb.com/article/imdb/track-movies-tv/ratingsfaq/G67Y87TFYYP6TWAV#. Accessed: 2024-01-07.
IMDb.
2024.
Ratings
FAQ.
https://help.imdb.com/article/imdb/track-movies-tv/ratingsfaq/G67Y87TFYYP6TWAV#. Accessed: 2024-01-08.
Immorlica, N.; Mao, J.; Slivkins, A.; and Wu, Z. S. 2018. Incentivizing exploration with selective data disclosure. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.06026.
Jagadeesan, M.; Garg, N.; and Steinhardt, J. 2022. Supplyside equilibria in recommender systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.13489.
Joseph, M.; Kearns, M.; Morgenstern, J. H.; and Roth, A.
2016. Fairness in learning: Classic and contextual bandits.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 29.
Krafft, P. M.; Shmueli, E.; Griffiths, T. L.; Tenenbaum, J. B.;
et al. 2021. Bayesian collective learning emerges from
heuristic social learning. Cognition, 212: 104469.

Letterboxd. 2023. The Score: we’ve updated our weightedrating calculations.
https://letterboxd.com/journal/thescore-new-weighted-average-ratings/. Accessed: 2024-0107.
Liu, Y.; Radanovic, G.; Dimitrakakis, C.; Mandal, D.; and
Parkes, D. C. 2017. Calibrated fairness in bandits. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.01875.
Minka, T. 2000. Estimating a Dirichlet distribution.
MyAnimeList. 2024. How are MyAnimeList scores calculated? https://myanimelist.net/info.php?go=topanime. Accessed: 2024-01-08.
Nie, X.; Tian, X.; Taylor, J.; and Zou, J. 2018. Why adaptively collected data have negative bias and how to correct
for it. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics, 1261–1269. PMLR.
Pallais, A. 2014. Inefficient hiring in entry-level labor markets. American Economic Review, 104(11): 3565–99.
Papanastasiou, Y.; Bimpikis, K.; and Savva, N. 2018.
Crowdsourcing exploration. Management Science, 64(4):
1727–1746.
Patro, G. K.; Porcaro, L.; Mitchell, L.; Zhang, Q.; Zehlike,
M.; and Garg, N. 2022. Fair ranking: a critical review, challenges, and future directions. In Proceedings of the 2022
ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, 1929–1942.
Robbins, H. 1964. The empirical Bayes approach to statistical decision problems. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35(1): 1–20.
Russo, D. J.; Van Roy, B.; Kazerouni, A.; Osband, I.; Wen,
Z.; et al. 2018. A tutorial on thompson sampling. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(1): 1–96.
Salganik, M. J.; Dodds, P. S.; and Watts, D. J. 2006. Experimental study of inequality and unpredictability in an artificial cultural market. science, 311(5762): 854–856.
Sellke, M.; and Slivkins, A. 2021. The price of incentivizing exploration: A characterization via thompson sampling
and sample complexity. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
Conference on Economics and Computation, 795–796.
Shahout, R.; Peisakhovsky, Y.; Stoikov, S.; and Garg, N.
2023. Interface Design to Mitigate Inflation in Recommender Systems. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, 897–903.
Simchowitz, M.; and Slivkins, A. 2021.
Exploration
and incentives in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.00360.
Singh, A.; and Joachims, T. 2018. Fairness of Exposure in
Rankings. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD ’18, 2219–2228. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450355520.
Slivkins, A. 2021. Exploration and persuasion.
Suh, E. 2020. dirichlet. https://github.com/ericsuh/dirichlet.
Tadelis, S. 2016. Reputation and feedback systems in online
platform markets. Annual Review of Economics, 8: 321–340.

Uber.
2024.
How
Star
Ratings
Work.
https://www.uber.com/ca/en/drive/basics/how-ratingswork/. Accessed: 2024-01-07.
Upwork.
2024.
Job
Success
Score.
https://support.upwork.com/hc/en-us/articles/211068358Job-Success-Score. Accessed: 2024-01-07.
Vellodi, N. 2018. Ratings design and barriers to entry. Available at SSRN 3267061.
Wan, M.; and McAuley, J. J. 2018. Item recommendation
on monotonic behavior chains. In Pera, S.; Ekstrand, M. D.;
Amatriain, X.; and O’Donovan, J., eds., Proceedings of the
12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, RecSys
2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, October 2-7, 2018, 86–94.
ACM.
Wan, M.; Misra, R.; Nakashole, N.; and McAuley, J. J. 2019.
Fine-Grained Spoiler Detection from Large-Scale Review
Corpora. In Korhonen, A.; Traum, D. R.; and Màrquez, L.,
eds., Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy,
July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, 2605–
2610. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Wang, L.; Bai, Y.; Sun, W.; and Joachims, T. 2021. Fairness
of exposure in stochastic bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 10686–10696. PMLR.
Wang, L.; and Joachims, T. 2023. Uncertainty quantification
for fairness in two-stage recommender systems. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining, 940–948.
Wei, T.; Feng, F.; Chen, J.; Wu, Z.; Yi, J.; and He, X.
2021. Model-agnostic counterfactual reasoning for eliminating popularity bias in recommender system. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining, 1791–1800.
Zehlike, M.; Yang, K.; and Stoyanovich, J. 2022. Fairness in
Ranking, Part II: Learning-to-Rank and Recommender Systems. ACM Comput. Surv., 55(6).
Zervas, G.; Proserpio, D.; and Byers, J. W. 2021. A first look
at online reputation on Airbnb, where every stay is above
average. Marketing Letters, 32: 1–16.
Zhang, D.; Mao, R.; Li, H.; and Mao, J. 2011. How to count
thumb-ups and thumb-downs: user-rating based ranking of
items from an axiomatic perspective. In Advances in Information Retrieval Theory: Third International Conference,
ICTIR 2011, Bertinoro, Italy, September 12-14, 2011. Proceedings 3, 238–249. Springer.
Zukin, P. 2024.
Yelp adds numerical ratings to
help consumers easily compare multiple businesses.
https://blog.yelp.com/news/yelp-adds-numerical-ratingsto-help-consumers-easily-compare-multiple-businesses/.
Accessed: 2024-01-08.

A

Proof of fixed model theorems

Theorem 3.1. Suppose we have a prior-weighted rating system in the fixed setting with prior parameters (η α̃, η β̃). Fix
product v with true quality qv and consider quality estimation after t timesteps.

≥ 0 increases, (1) squared bias
2
E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] − qv
is nondecreasing; (2) variThen, as η



This demonstrates that variance is always strictly decreasing for η ≥ 0.

ance Var[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] is strictly decreasing in η.
Proof. In the fixed setting with binary ratings, for a product with true quality qv , |S(v, t)| = t and R(v, t) ∼
Binomial(t, qv ). We can break down squared bias as follows:
#
!2
η α̃ + R(v, t)
qv − qv
E
η α̃ + η β̃ + t
(6)
!2
η α̃ − η α̃qv − η β̃qv
.
η α̃ + η β̃ + t
(7)
"

2

(E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] − qv ) =

=

Theorem 3.2. Suppose we have a prior-weighted rating system in the fixed setting with prior parameters (η α̃, η β̃). Consider quality estimation after t timesteps.


Then, as a function of true product quality, squared bias
2
E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] − qv
is convex with a global mini-

α̃
mum at α̃+
, while variance Var[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] is concave
β̃
with a global maximum at 1/2.

Variance can also be broken down accordingly:
"
Var[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] = E



2
q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t) − E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)] qv
(8)
2

E[(R(v, t) − E[R(v, t)]) |qv ]
(η α̃ + η β̃ + t)2
Var[R(v, t)|qv ]
=
(η α̃ + η β̃ + t)2
tqv (1 − qv )
=
.
(η α̃ + η β̃ + t)2

=

(9)

# Proof. Using the expression of variance derived in Equation
11, it is evident that the error from variance takes on a concave shape with a global maximum at 1/2 when interpreted
as a function of qv . To conclude the proof it suffices to show
that the bias term derived in Equation 7 is convex and has
α̃
global minimum α̃+
when interpreted as a function of qv .
β̃
We begin again by differentiating:

(10)
(11)

∂
∂
(E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] − qv )2 =
∂qv
∂qv

The expected MSE can be written as follows:

MSE =

η α̃ − η α̃qv − η β̃qv
η α̃ + η β̃ + t

!2

∝ −2

tqv (1 − qv )
+
.
(η α̃ + η β̃ + t)2

2
η α̃ + tqv
− qv
η α̃ + η β̃ + t
(16)
!
η α̃ − η α̃qv − η β̃qv
.
η α̃ + η β̃ + t
(17)



We now differentiate the bias term with respect to η:
∂
∂η

η α̃ − η α̃qv − η β̃qv
η α̃ + η β̃ + t

α̃
This final term is negative when qv < α̃+
, positive when
β̃

!2
∝

∂
η2
(12)
∂η (η(α̃ + β̃) + t)2

=

2ηt2
.
(η(α̃ + β̃) + t)4

(13)

This value is clearly positive for all η > 0 and 0 at η =
0, indicating the value of the bias term does indeed strictly
increase when η increases, while being nondecreasing at η =
0.
Similarly, we differentiate the variance term with respect
to η:
∂ tqv (1 − qv )
∂
1
∝
∂η (η α̃ + η β̃ + t)2
∂η (η α̃ + η β̃ + t)2
=

−2(α̃ + β̃)
.
(η α̃ + η β̃ + t)3

(14)
(15)

α̃
qv > α̃+
, and zero at equality, implying a local minimum
β̃
α̃
.
at α̃+
β̃

To prove convexity, note that
∂2
(E[q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, t)|qv ] − qv )2 ∝ 2
∂qv2

η α̃ + η β̃
η α̃ + η β̃ + t

!
≥ 0,
(18)

indicating the function is convex.

B

Supplemental Visualizations

This appendix contains supplemental graphs from our calibrated simulations.

400

Count

300

200

100

0

0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
True Quality qv

0.8

1.0

1
Figure 7: Histogram of true quality
distribution of products
in the KuaiRec dataset. Note the long left tail and high concentration of products with a quality of 0.7-0.9.

Figure 9: Facet plot showing bias-variance trade-off between
quality estimators. The x-axis represents true quality, while
the y-axis represents estimated quality. The red line represents a perfectly omniscient estimator. As prior strength η
increases, the variance of the estimator decreases over all
values of v, t, but the bias of the estimator increases.

C
0.14

η

0.12

MSE

0.10
0.08

0
1
10
1000

0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

0

10

20
30
40
Number of Timesteps t

50

1
Figure 8: Lineplot of mean-squared
error different quality
estimators in fixed setting over time. η = 0 represents the
sample mean estimator, η = 1 represents the empirical
Bayes (EB) estimator. The sample mean estimator (η = 0)
has high MSE for low time-steps, due to variance in ratings. On the other extreme, for extremely high prior strength
η = 1000, the platform never learns from ratings data. This
presents evidence that proper calibration of prior strength
can help solve the cold start problem in the context of accurate quality estimates for products.

Discussion of bias-variance decomposition
in responsive model

This appendix discusses a decomposition of the biasvariance decomposition in Equation 7 as applied to the responsive setting. While mean-squared prediction error may
no longer serve as an ideal metric for consumer and producer welfare in this setting, we demonstrate that markets
that care about MSE for its own sake can still reason about
prediction error for a prior-weighted rating system so long as
they can make statements about the changes in how products
are sampled based on changes in qv and η.
Let the number of reviews for product v with fixed true
quality qv , prior parameters α̃, β̃ and system-level prior
strength η, calculated at timestep t, be Nα̃,β̃ (qv , η, t). We
focus on the number of reviews for a product at a fixed
time t with fixed prior parameters α̃, β̃, and so we simplify by omitting these variables in this notation, letting
N (qv , η) denote the number of reviews. Now, at this time
t, a prior-weighted rating system’s estimated quality for v
is given by q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, N (qv , η)), and the MSE is given by
E[(q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, N (qv , η)) − qv )2 |qv ]. We can break down bias
and variance of mean-squared prediction error through the
usage of the tower law of probability:
E[(q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, N (qv , η)) − qv )2 |qv ]
h
i
= E E[(q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, N (qv , η)) − qv )2 ] N (qv , η), qv

(19)

When the number of reviews at a given point in time is
fixed, we can treat the estimated quality identically to how it
is calculated in the fixed setting. This gives us the following
bias-variance breakdown:
E[(q̂ηα̃,ηβ̃ (v, N (qv , η)) − qv )2 |qv ]

!2 
η α̃ − η α̃qv − η β̃qv
qv 
= E
η α̃ + η β̃ + N (qv , η)
"
#
N (qv , η)qv (1 − qv )
+E
qv
(η α̃ + η β̃ + N (qv , η))2

can be achieved by setting the prior strength η in a priorweighted rating system to zero. For a product with n ratings, k of which are positive, a population average rating of
C, and an integer-valued threshold m, the Bayesian rating q
of a product is calculated to be
n
k
m
· +
·C
n+m n n+m
k + mC
=
,
n+m
which is equivalent to a prior-weighted rating system
with prior strength m and baseline prior distribution of
Beta(C, 1).
q=

(20)

From here, one may proceed with the proofs of the theorems in Section 3 so long as they can make statements about
the bias and variance terms in the above expression. In the
responsive model in this paper, N (qv , η) is a noisy random
variable that is a function of the play distribution in a multiarmed bandit. The theoretical challenge in proving stronger
results in the responsive setting is being able to characterize N (qv , η) for finite samples, and how it changes with η
– in this work, we show empirical results that the tradeoff
holds for a variety of consumer choice models (Thompson
sampling, and various models discussed in Appendix F).

E

Robustness tests for ordinal data and
additional datasets

In order to test if our prior-weighted approach generalizes
across different datasets and rating types that were more
complex than simple binary ratings, we repeated our experiments in Section 4.2 in a setting with ordinal ratings, using real-world data from online marketplaces where users
assign a five-star rating to a product. We looked at product
reviews on Amazon.com, where users can leave a star rating
out of 5 for a product they bought, as well as book reviews on
the book recommendation site Goodreads, where users can
D List of rating systems used by common
leave a star rating out of 5 for books they have read. On both
online platforms
sites, users must leave an integer rating (no half-stars are allowed), and zero-star reviews are permitted on Goodreads
Platform
Rating system
PRS Supported? but not Amazon. Table 2 provides a summary of the product
category of each dataset, and the number of products and
Amazon
Hidden (Amazon 2024)
No
ratings in each dataset.
Letterboxd
Hidden (Letterboxd 2023)
No
We sourced our Amazon data from a data repository origUpwork
Hidden (Upwork 2024)
No
inally collected and used by Hou et al. (2024)7 , and we
Hidden (IMDb 2024)
sourced our Goodreads data from a repository collected by
formerly Dirichlet
IMDb
No
the authors of Wan and McAuley (2018) and Wan et al.
(IMDb 2019)
(2019) 8 . Each repository separated user data into differDirichlet
MyAnimeList
Yes
ent product categories (e.g. the Goodreads data repository
(MyAnimeList 2024)
separated review data into separate datasets for fantasy novUber
Sample Mean (Uber 2024)
Yes
els, mystery novels, etc). To run our robustness tests, we
Yelp
Sample Mean (Zukin 2024) Yes
replicated the experiments in Section 4.2 on all 8 datasets
Etsy
Sample Mean (Etsy 2024)
Yes
in the Goodreads repository, and 10 out of the 34 datasets
in the Amazon repository. We chose to only use a portion
Table 1: Summary of rating systems used by popular online
of the datasets in the Amazon repository because many of
platforms, and whether or not prior-weighted rating systems
the datasets were distributionally similar to one another, so
(PRS) can capture the rating system.
for the sake of brevity we elected to choose a representative sample of 10 datasets from among the 34 by sorting the
This appendix contains a table of rating systems used by
datasets by number of products and evenly picking 10 from
real-world online platforms. Our table is broadly separated
among this list.
into three categories; platforms with hidden rating systems
Because of the ordinal nature of the ratings data in this
where the exact rating aggregation method is hidden to comsetting, we need to adjust our model primitives as defined in
bat fake reviews and brigading, sample mean rating systems
Section 2.1. Rather than a Beta-Bernoulli setting, we model
where the overall rating of a product is the average ratour ratings as being drawn from a categorical distribution
ing it has received over a certain period of time by trustwith a Dirichlet prior. Let K be the set of possible ratings
worthy reviewers, and Bayesian ratings, which calculates
for a product v (i.e. K = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} for Amazon proda weighted average between the sample mean rating and a
ucts and K = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} for Goodreads products). If
population-level mean rating. Assuming the reviews are bi7
nary, both sample mean and Bayesian ratings are captured
Licensed under the MIT License
8
by our prior-weighted ratings system. Sample mean ratings
Licensed under the Apache 2.0 license

Product Category
Children
Comics & Graphic
Fantasy & Paranormal
History & Biography
Mystery, Crime, Thriller
Poetry
Romance
Young Adult
All Beauty
Beauty & Personal Care
Clothing, Shoes, Jewelry
Health & Personal Care
Industrial & Scientific
Magazine Subscriptions
Patio, Lawn, Garden
Sports & Outdoor
Tools, Home Improvement
Video Games

Platform
Goodreads
Goodreads
Goodreads
Goodreads
Goodreads
Goodreads
Goodreads
Goodreads
Amazon
Amazon
Amazon
Amazon
Amazon
Amazon
Amazon
Amazon
Amazon
Amazon

# Items
124.1k
89.4k
258.6k
302.9k
219.2k
36.5k
335.4k
93.4k
112.6k
94.3k
7.2mil
60.3k
427.5k
3.4k
851.7k
1.6mil
1.5mil
137.2k

# Ratings
734.6k
542.4k
3.4mil
2.1mil
1.8mil
154.6k
3.6mil
2.4mil
701.5k
2.1mil
66.0mil
494.1k
5.2mil
71.5k
16.5mil
19.6mil
27.0mil
4.6mil

Table 2: Table showing details about each dataset used in
Appendix E.

ratings for a product v are drawn from a categorical distribution with weights {pv,k }P
k∈K , then we define the true quality
qv of this product to be j∈K pv,j · j.
To estimate the quality of a product at time T , we define
S(v, k, T ) to be the set of k-star reviews for product v at
time T , and N (v, k, t) := |S(v, k, T )|. The prior parameters, instead of being for a Beta distribution, are now for a
Dirichlet distribution; they are given by α̂ = {α̂j }j∈K . Due
to the conjugacy of the Dirichlet distribution and the categorical distribution, we can define the estimated quality for
v at time t as

P

j∈K
q̂α̂ (v, t) = P

N (v, j, t) · j

j∈K N (v, j, t)

(21)

Our notions of prior strength and shape remain the same
as before; that is, if we fix a prior shape α̃ = {α̃j }j∈K ,
our choice of strength η ≥ 0 changes the Dirichlet prior
by setting α̂ = {η α̃j }j∈K . The rest of our also model definitions remain unchanged. We kept the same experimental
hyperparameters of the original experiment in Section 4.2,
with the exception of our η values now being chosen from
{0.001, 1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000}, and our Thompson sampling model for consumer choice now using Dirichlet priors rather than Beta priors. To fit the Dirichlet distribution to
training data, we utilized the fixed-point iteration technique
highlighted in Minka (2000). The specific code implementation we used came from a third-party Python library that
implements this approach (Suh 2020).

Figure 10: Facet grid showing the product quality distribution of each dataset used for ordinal data experiments.
Note how each dataset is left-skewed and roughly follows
a J-curve, similar to the original KuaiRec dataset. Note the
spikes in these distributions at integer-valued true quality
values, which arise from the abundance of products with low
review counts.

1e6

1e6

Dataset
All Beauty
Beauty and Personal Care
Clothing Shoes and Jewelry
Health and Personal Care
Industrial and Scientific
Magazine Subscriptions
Patio Lawn and Garden
Sports and Outdoors
Tools and Home Improvement
Video Games
Prior Strength
0.001
1
10
100
1000
10000

Expected Total Regret

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200
Standard Deviation of Selection Rate

0.225

1

Figure 11: Scatterplot of average standard deviation in selection rate against total expected regret for responsive-setting
experiments with Amazon datasets.
Our results are shown in Figure 1 and Figure 11. We find
that the efficiency-fairness trade-off we uncovered using the
Kuairec dataset exists with datasets of various sizes in the
Goodreads and Amazon respositories as well; as η increases,
efficiency decreases but fairness increases. We found the
number of products in the dataset to have little overall bearing on results; this is likely due to the resampling step in
our empirical setup. Importantly, we find that the key tradeoff illustrated in our paper is present in rating systems with
ordinal ratings, as well as in systems with binary ones.

F

Robustness tests for different selection
mechanisms

The responsive-setting empirical setup detailed in Section
4.2 assumes that agents are Thompson samplers, which
is meant to serve as a metaphor for real-world customers
roughly choosing the best product on the market based on
the ratings information available to them. The amount of
noise in this decision-making process can vary from platform to platform; for example, users in some online platforms may pay less attention to other user-generated reviews, due to the user interface de-emphasizing ratings. In
order to capture how our results may change in response to
this noisiness, we use this appendix to repeat our empirical
experiments while replacing our Thompson sampling choice
algorithm with lower-fidelity variants.
To generalize our Thompson sampling algorithm into
a parameterizable algorithm that we can tune, we use ksampling. This is a simple variant of Thompson sampling,
which is defined as follows: Instead of drawing a sample
from n different samples and selecting the arm that maximizes the expected reward conditional on that sample, we instead take the top-k most expected reward-maximizing arms
and select one of those arms uniformly at random. Note that
at k = 1, this approach is equivalent to traditional Thompson
sampling, while at k = n, we are picking an arm uniformly

1.0

Nucleus Size
1
2
3
4
5
Prior Strength
0.001
1
10
100
1000
10000

0.9
0.8
Expected Total Regret

4.0

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.100

0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
Standard Deviation of Selection Rate

0.225

1
Figure 12: Scatterplot of average
standard deviation in selection rate against total expected regret for robustness tests
of the responsive setting when the consumer sampling algorithm is modified. Colours represent the nucleus size k,
while size represents the prior strength η. The efficiencyfairness trade-off illustrated in Figure 3 holds for all values
of k except for when k = 5, where sampling products purely
at random at each timestep incurs a regret-maximizing but
”fair” solution, and the value of η does not affect fairness or
efficiency.

at random.9
We repeat our KuaiRec experiments while replacing Thompson sampling with k-sampling, varying k ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}; we refer to k as the nucleus size. We choose
our η values from {0.001, 1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000}, and
keep all other hyperparameters unchanged from Section 4.2.
Note that because we keep the market size of 5 unchanged
from our original simulations, our sampling algorithm samples uniformly at random when k = 5.
We find that the central efficiency-fairness trade-off is surprisingly resilient to degradations in the consumer sampling
algorithm in identifying the best-performing product. While
the uniformly random selection case k = 5 behaves chaotically, due to the product choice at each timestep being completely randomly chosen and not informed by any kind of
prior knowledge, all other nucleus sizes yield an efficiencyversus-fairness curve that (while noisy for higher values of
k) qualitatively exhibit similar behavior as in our primary
experiments. In particular, as η increases, regret generally
increases while unfairness decreases.

9
We note that this is distinct from the traditional Top-K approach, which samples the top K arms in proportion to their original probabilities; we use k-sampling so that one extreme matches
the uniform sampling of our static model.

increases in fairness become clear.

Figure 13: True quality distributions and fairness-efficiency
tradeoff scatterplot when responsive experiments are repeated on a version of the KuaiRec dataset when the underlying watch-time threshold for a ”like” is 0.8 (the centered
case) and 1.2 (the right-skewed case). When η is small, the
tradeoff is noisy, but as η grows larger the same trade-off
discovered in Figure 3 still holds.

G

Robustness tests for datasets with
different ratings distributions

The KuaiRec dataset, as well as the datasets used in Appendix E, all have product quality distributions that resemble a left-skewed J-curve, which is common in many online
platforms (Hu, Zhang, and Pavlou 2009). In this appendix,
we test to see how the results of our empirical experiments in
the responsive setting in Section 4.2 are affected by changes
in the underlying true distribution of product quality.
We can test this by simply varying the threshold for a user
liking a video in KuaiRec; we assumed this threshold was
a watch ratio of 40% in Section 3.2, but by increasing this
threshold, we can change the underlying true quality distribution of videos in KuaiRec to resemble a centered, or even
extremely right-skewed distribution. We created centered
and right-skewed variants of the KuaiRec dataset used in
Section 3.2 by changing the like threshold to 80% and 120%
respectively (note that a threshold above 100% implies that
the user watched the video more than once). We then repeated our responsive-setting experiments in Section 4.2 using these datasets and η ∈ {0.001, 1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000}
while holding all other hyperparameters constant.
We find that the efficiency-fairness trade-off illustrated
in our original experiments persists when the distribution
in product quality of the underlying distribution is not leftskewed. However, lower values of η are noisier, likely due
to the more frequent occurrence of negative ratings induced
by a higher ”liked” threshold, hindering the Thompson sampling agent’s attempts to conduct best-arm identification. As
η increases past 10, however, the decreases in efficiency and

