MATHEMATICS OF OPERATIONS RESEARCH

Vol. 7, No. 4, November 1982
Printed in U.S.A.

THE ECONOMICS OF MATCHING: STABILITY AND
INCENTIVES*t
ALVIN E. ROTH
University of Illinois

This paper considers some game-theoretic aspects of matching problems and proced
the sort which involve matching the members of one group of agents with one or more
members of a second, disjoint group of agents, all of whom have preferences over the possible
resulting matches. The main focus of this paper is on determining the extent to which
matching procedures can be designed which give agents the incentive to honestly reveal their
preferences, and which produce stable matches.
Two principal results are demonstrated. The first is that no matching procedure exists which
always yields a stable outcome and gives players the incentive to reveal their true preferences,

even though procedures exist which accomplish either of these goals separately. The second
result is that matching procedures do exist, however, which always yield a stable outcome and
which always give all the agents in one of the two disjoint sets of agents the incentive to reveal
their true preferences.

1. Introduction. The purpose of this paper is to explore the underlying economic
structure common to matching problems and procedures. By matching problems, I refer

to any of the pervasive class of problems which involve matching the members of one
group of agents with one or more members of a second, disjoint group of agents, all of
whom have preferences over the possible resulting matches. Thus the problems arising
from the need to match, e.g., students with educational institutions, athletes with
teams, adoptive children with adoptive parents, men with women (in marriage, mixed
doubles, or computer dating), civil servants with civil service positions, and authors
(via their papers) with scholarly journals, are all, in many of their most important
aspects, matching problems.1
By matching procedures, I refer to the institutional arrangements by which the
matching is accomplished. These institutional arrangements may range from completely decentralized procedures, in which agents negotiate directly with one another
(as in marriage in contemporary Western societies), all the way to completely centralized procedures, in which all agents state their preferences for possible matches, which
*Received April 6, 1981; revised September 9, 1981.

A MS 1980 subject classification. Primary: 90D45.

OR/MS Index 1978 subject classification. Primary: 231 Games/group decisions.
Key words. Matching; assignment; preference revelation.
tThis work has been supported by NSF grant SOC 78-09928 to the University of Illinois. It is also a pleasure
to acknowledge stimulating conversations and correspondence on this subject with Lester Dubins, David
Gale, Zvi Ritz, and Lloyd Shapley.
'The requirement that there be two disjoint (nonintersecting) sets of agents excludes from the class of
problems under consideration here those in which there is only one set of agents, who are to be matched to
one another; e.g., the problem of matching roommates, bridge partners, etc. The requirement that both sets
of agents have active preferences over possible matches will exclude simple assignment problems, such as
matching students with dormitories, where the dormitories have no preferences over students. And we will
be concentrating on those problems in which the preferences of the participants are related to the matching
itself, rather than to other features of the outcome. (Thus we consider matching civil servants to civil service
positions, where the wage is part of the job description, rather than considering the general labor market and
the problem of matching employees and employers, with the wage to be determined as part of the outcome.)
These restrictions will be made precise in the formal model, and relaxation of some of these restrictions will
also be discussed.
617

0364-765X/82/0704/0617$01.25
Copyright ? 1982, The Institute of Management Sciences

618

ALVIN E. ROTIJ

are then assigned according to some specified algorithm (as in the procedu
graduating medical students in the United States are matched with the ho

which they complete their training). The main focus of this paper will be on

ing the extent to which matching procedures can be designed which give
incentive to honestly reveal their preferences, and which produce stable matc
Two principal results will be demonstrated. The first is that no matchin
exists which always yields a stable outcome and gives players the incenti
their true preferences, even though procedures exist which accomplish either
goals separately. The second result is that matching procedures do exis
which always yield a stable outcome and which always give all the agents
two disjoint sets of agents the incentive to reveal their true preferences.
possible to find matching procedures which produce stable outcomes and which
confine to one of the two kinds of agents being matched any possible incentive to
misrepresent their true preferences. For instance, in a matching problem which
involves matching individuals with institutions, stable matching procedures exist which
give every individual the incentive to reveal his true preferences. Why this might be a
desirable property of matching procedures will be discussed.
The first result is similar in spirit to a number of impossibility results which have
been encountered by investigators seeking to design nondictatorial3 social-choice
procedures which operate in fairly unrestricted domains (cf. Gibbard (1973) or
Satterthwaite (1975)). The second result shows that, by exploiting the structure
associated with the problem, it may be possible to confine the difficulties associated
with misrepresentation of preferences to a manageable subset of the agents involved.4
Together, the two results will permit us to draw some conclusions about "optimal"
matching procedures from the point of view of someone trying to minimize the
incentive to misrepresent preferences.
The difficulties associated with misrepresentation are of not only theoretical interest,
but also of considerable practical concern. For instance, in the early 1950's, problems
associated with the incentives for misrepresentation in an earlier procedure motivated
a complete revision of the matching procedure employed by the National Intern and
Resident Matching Program (NIRMP), which is the program through which most
graduating medical doctors and hospitals are matched in the United States. A future
paper is planned to discuss the NIRMP procedure.
In the next section, a formal model of matching problems is introduced. ?3 reviews
the structure of the set of stable outcomes for such problems, which has been well
known since the work of Gale and Shapley (1962). ??4 through 6 present the analysis
of the incentive properties of matching procedures, and ?7 concludes.

2. The formal model. We begin by introducing a specialized model of the matching problem, which will turn out to be sufficiently general to use to explore the general

problem. The simplest matching problem to model is the "marriage problem," which

consists of two sets of agents M = {m1 . . ., m} and W= {w, . . ., w } ("men" and
"women"). Each mi in M has a complete and transitive strict preference relation P(m,)
2A stable match will be defined as a match-up of agents such that no pair of agents would both prefer to
be matched to each other than to their current partners. Such a match is in the core of the cooperative game
which would result if the individual agents were able to freely negotiate their own matches. Why this kind of
stable match might be a desirable outcome even of procedures in which this is not the case will be discussed.
3In the context of matching, the requirement that a matching procedure yield a stable outcome is a strong
form of the requirement that it be nondictatorial.
4The alternative approach which has been taken in the social choice literature is to look for restrictions on
the allowable preferences of the agents which will permit possibility results. See, for example, Kalai and

Muller (1977), Maskin (1976), Ritz (1981). Conclusions related to the second result presented here have
recently been developed independently by Dubins and Freedman (1980).

ECONOMICS OF MATCHING STABILITY & INCENTIVES

619

defined on W. When no confusion will occur, P(mi) will sometim

thus the statement "wk is preferred by mi to w." can be written as w

Each wi in W has a similar preference P(wi) defined on

= (P(m,), . . ., P(wn)) the 2n-vector of all the agents' preferenc

times be referred to as the preference profile.

An outcome of the (monogamous) marriage problem is a onemen and women, i.e., an invertible function x: M - W. An outco

by x = [(ml,x(ml)),(m2,x(m2)),. .. , (mn,x(mM))] where x(mi

matched with man m,, and x- (wj) = mi is the man matched wit
A matching x is stable if no man and no woman who are not m

at x prefer each other to their partners at x. That is, x is stable if t

and woman Wq such that both

(i)

and

WqPkx(mk)

(ii) mkPqX l(wq).

If a pair mk and wq do exist satisfying (i) a

and wq. The motivation for this terminol
that the set of stable outcomes is equal
results if any man and woman may mar
agent's preference for an outcome is dete
partners).

The marriage problem as outlined above differs from the general matching problem
in three principal respects. First, in the marriage problem, each agent is to be matched

with exactly one partner, but in the general matching problem, different agents may
need to be matched with different numbers of partners, so that each agent has a
"quota," and an outcome is a function which matches each agent with his quota of
partners.6 For our purposes, this difference between the marriage problem and the
general matching problem turns out to be of no consequence, since all the arguments
which will be used can be carried over virtually unchanged to the general case. Second,
the marriage problem was defined as having equal numbers of men and women, and
without the possibility that a feasible outcome could leave any agent unmatched, while
in the general matching problem, there may be an excess of one kind of agent, and an

outcome need not make a match for every agent. This more general case can be
handled by adding suitable "dummy" agents corresponding to the option of being
unmatched in the final outcome. The third respect in which the marriage problem as
described above is more restrictive than the general matching problem is that indiffer-

ence between potential partners has been ruled out by the assumption that all
preferences are strict. Relaxing this assumption would actually complicate some of the
results. To avoid these complications, only strict preferences will be considered.

Thus the marriage problem will be used to represent the general matching problem
with strict preferences. This should not obscure the fact that much of the interest of the
5That is, the preference relations P(m,) (or P(wi)) have the following properties:
(1) transitivity: if WjPiWk and wkPiwI, then wjPiwl;

(2) completeness: for all distinct wj, wk in W, exactly one of the relations wjPiWk or wkP,wj holds
The interpretation of the preference relations Pi as strict preference relations means that we are ruling out
the possibility that an agent will be indifferent between two potential partners. (Also, it is never the case that
wjP.jW.) See the discussion at the end of this section.
6Note that, in the general case, the fact that each agent's preferences are defined over individual agents
with whom he might be matched means that the desirability of a particular match is not affected by the

other matches made. Thus, for example, a college's desire to have a geographically diverse student body
cannot be directly reflected in this model, although it might be possible for the college to achieve the same
effect by indicating that the college preferred, say, students from New Mexico to otherwise equally well
qualified students from New York.

620

ALVIN E. ROTH

results to be presented derives from matching problems which are not marriage
problems, since perhaps the most common kinds of matching problems are those
which involve matching individuals with institutions, with the institutions having
quotas greater than 1. The results which will be presented apply unchanged to these
cases as well.

3. The set of stable outcomes. This section reviews two surprising facts about the
set of stable outcomes of matching problems, closely following the discussion of these
matters originally given by Gale and Shapley (1962). First, the set of stable outcomes
of the general matching problem is always nonempty, i.e., regardless of the preferences
of the players, at least one stable outcome always exists. Second, for each of the two
disjoint sets of agents, there always exists a stable outcome which is preferred to all
other stable outcomes by every member of that set of agents.
As discussed in the previous section, it will be sufficient to prove both results for the
case of the marriage problem. It will be convenient to refer to the agents M

= { mI ... , m } and W = { w- , . . . , w} as "men" and "women," respectively.
THEOREM 1. The set of stable outcomes is always nonempty.

PROOF. Following Gale and Shapley (1962) the proof proceeds by displaying a
procedure which, for arbitrary preferences of the agents, constructs a stable outcome.

The procedure works as follows:

Step 1. (a) Each man proposes to his most preferred woman.
(b) Each woman rejects all but her most preferred of the men who have proposed,
and keeps the most preferred man as her suitor.

Step k. (a) Each man who has been rejected in the previous step proposes to the
most preferred of those women who have not yet rejected him (i.e., to whom he has
not yet proposed).

(b) Each woman keeps as her suitor the man she most prefers among those who
have proposed (including the man she kept as her suitor at the end of step k - 1), and
rejects the rest.

The procedure terminates at the outcome which results when every woman has
received at least one proposal (at which point each woman has exactly one suitor).
Since the sets of agents are finite, this always occurs in a finite number of steps. The
resulting outcome is stable, since any woman preferred by a man to his own final
partner has already rejected him, and hence prefers her final partner to him. This
completes the proof.7

A specific realization of this repeated proposal procedure, when the preference
profile of the agents is P, will be denoted G(P). Thus we can speak of the women
proposed to, or the men rejected, at any step k of G(P). The outcome selected by this
procedure when the preference profile is P will be denoted g(P). Gale and Shapley
also proved the following.
THEOREM 2. There is a stable outcome weakly preferred by every man to any other
stable outcome, and one weakly preferred by every woman.

PROOF. We will show that the stable outcome g(P) is weakly preferred by every
man to every other stable outcome, i.e., that for any other stable outcome, every man

either gets a less desirable match than at g(P), or else gets the same partner at both
outcomes. The symmetry of the problem then implies that the corresponding outcome
7The only adjustment which would be needed to handle the general case in which each agent is to be
matched to some quota of partners would be that each man proposes to his full quota at each step, and each
woman rejects men only when her quota is full.

ECONOMICS OF MATCHING STABILITY & INCENTIVES

621

for the women can be constructed by exchanging the roles of M and

proposal procedure, i.e., by having women propose, and men acce
For each man mi, call a woman wj possible for mi if there is so

for which x(mi) = wj. Suppose that, up to step k - 1 of the pro

has been rejected by a possible woman, and that, at step k, mi is rej
we show that w; is not possible for mi, we will have shown by induc
ever rejected by a possible woman (at any step of G(P)), which is sufficient to
complete the proof.

Let ml be the man who wj did not reject at step k. Then wj prefers ml to mi, and m
prefers wj to any wi who hasn't already rejected him. By the inductive assumption, thi

means ml prefers wj to any (other) wi who is possible for him. So any outcome wh
pairs mi and wj and pairs ml with a woman who is possible for him, is unstable w
respect to ml and wj. So wj isn't possible for mi, which completes the proof.
So far we have discussed the repeated proposal procedure introduced in Gale and

Shapley (1962) simply as an algorithm which permits a constructive proof of certain
propositions about stable outcomes.8 The next section concerns questions which arise
if we wish to consider the possibility of actually implementing some matching
procedure as a mechanism for resolving matching problems, or if we wish to evaluate
the effects of some procedure already in use.

4. Incentives and stability. Since each agent alone knows his own preferences, any
matching procedure which depends on agents' preferences can be thought of as
consisting of two parts: a mechanism for eliciting the preferences of the agents, and a
mechanism for aggregating these elicited preferences to determine an outcome. This

section is concerned with the question of what kinds of matching procedures, if any,
can be designed so as to give the agents the incentive to reveal their true preferences.9
If a procedure does not give the players the incentive to reveal their true preferences,

then the resulting outcome may not possess certain desirable properties even if the
aggregation mechanism produces outcomes which always possess these properties with
respect to the stated preferences.

A different kind of problem concerning incentives arises for matching procedures
which do not result in stable outcomes, since such procedures give at least one pair of
agents the incentive to disregard the matching procedure, and seek an alternative
outcome. Of course, it may be possible to compel the agents to accept the outcome, in
spite of these incentives. For instance, the procedure by which some high school
athletes are matched with colleges involves signing "letters of intent," after which
athletes are effectively prohibited from further negotiating with other schools. (Professional athletes in several sports are matched with teams under an even more restrictive
draft, which prevents a player from negotiating with any team but the one which drafts
him.) However in situations in which compulsion plays no part, it is desirable for a
matching procedure to yield stable outcomes. A procedure which does so for arbitrary
preference profiles will be called a stable matching procedure.
8These results have been generalized in an illuminating paper by Crawford and Knoer (1981) to a class of
labor markets in which wages are determined as part of the matching process. They introduce a "salary
adjustment procedure" which operates in much the same way as the repeated proposal procedure. Ritz
(1982) demonstrates generalizations of these results and those obtained in ?4 on a wide related class of
two-sided markets. Knuth (1976) further discusses the structure of the set of stable outcomes, and discusses
computational features of various procedures.
9Thus, in a centralized procedure which elicits preferences by asking the agents to rank-order their
preferred matches, we wish to know if procedures can be designed which give agents the incentive to rank
the alternatives according to their true preferences. In a decentralized procedure which elicits preferences
through the agent's actions (e.g., by supposing that men propose to their most preferred woman), we wish to
know if procedures can be designed which give agents the incentive to act in this straightforward manner.

622

ALVIN E. ROTI

Before proceeding further with this discussion, we need to make precise what is
meant by a procedure which gives agents an incentive to reveal their true preferences.
Once a given mechanism for aggregating stated preferences is adopted, the matching
problem becomes a noncooperative game among the agents, whose payoff consists of
the outcome which results, and whose strategy choices consist of what preferences to
state (or act according to, cf. footnote 9). Here we define a procedure which gives the
agents the incentives to reveal their true preferences as one which aggregates stated

preferences in a manner such that, in the resulting noncooperative game, it is a
dominant strategy for each player to state his preferences honestly.10 In such a
procedure, no matter what preferences other players may state, a player who misrepresents his preferences can achieve no better outcome than if he had stated them
correctly, and he may, of course, do worse."
The following result may now be stated: no stable matching procedure for the
general matching problem exists which gives all the players an incentive to reveal their
preferences.

THEOREM 3. No stable matching procedure for the general matching problem exists
for which truthful revelation of preferences is a dominant strategy for all agents.

PROOF. It will be sufficient to demonstrate that a matching problem exists for
which no stable matching procedure has truthful revelation as a dominant strategy. Let

the two sets of agents be M= {m,m2,m3} and W= {wl,w2,w3}. Let h be an

arbitrary stable matching procedure which, for any stated preference profile P selects

some outcome h(P) contained in the set C(P) of outcomes which are stable with
respect to the preference profile P. Suppose that the preferences of the players a
given by the preference profile P = (P(ml), P(m2), P(m3), P(w), P(w2), P(w3)) defin

as follows:12

P(m,): w2Plw1Plw3,

P(m2): WlP2w2P2w3,
P(m3): w1P3w2P3w3,

P(Wl): mAP,m3Plm2,
P(w2): m3P2mlP2m2,

P(w3): mlP3m2P3m3.
Then the set of stable outcomes is

C(P) = {x = [(ml, W2),(m2,W3),(m3,w)], y = [(mI l,W),(m2,w3),(m3,w2)]}.

That is, this preference profile has exactly two stable outcomes: the outcome x, which
matches ml with w2, m2 with w3, and m3 with wl, and the outcome y, which matches
m, with w1, m2 with w3, and m3 with w2. Note that the men prefer x while the women

prefer y (with m2 and w3 indifferent). Since h is a stable matching procedure, h(P)
equals either x or y.

10When any possible true preferences may occur, an equivalent definition is that a procedure which gives

the agents an incentive to reveal their true preferences is one in which, in the resulting noncooperative game
it is always a Nash equilibrium for all the players to state their true preferences (cf. Dasgupta, Hammond,

and Maskin (1979)).

1 1 All judgments about whether an agent likes one outcome better than another must obviously be made in
terms of the agent's true preferences.

'2That is, ml prefers w2 to wI to W3; m2 and m3 prefer w1 to w2 to w3; w1 prefers ml to m3 to m2, etc

ECONOMICS OF MATCHING STABILITY & INCENTIVES

623

Now suppose that, instead of the preference relation P(w,), w1 i
alternative preference relation P'(wl) given by

P'(WI): mIPjm2P'm3.
Let P'= (P(ml), P(m2), P(m3), P'(wl), P(w2), P(w3)) be the preference profile which
differs from P only in that P'(wl) replaces P(wl). Then the outcome y is the unique
stable outcome with respect to the preference profile P', i.e., the set of stable outcomes

is C(P') = {y}. Since h is a stable matching procedure, h(P') = y.
Similarly, let P" be the preference profile which differs from P only in that P"(ml)
replaces P(m,), where P"(m,) is given by

P"(ml): W2P;W3P'w 1.
Then the outcome x is the unique stable outcome with respect to P", i.e., C(P")
= {x}, and so h(P") = x.

So if, in the original problem, h(P) equals x, then wI has an incentive to stat
preference relation P'(wl) instead of the true preference P(w,), in order to chan

outcome from x toy (which changes wl's partner from m3 to ml). And if, instead, h
equals y, then it is m1 who has an incentive to misrepresent his preferences as P "(m

to change the outcome from y to h(P") = x. Since h was an arbitrary stable ma
procedure, this completes the proof.

To see the role played by stability in Theorem 3, observe that there are effici
matching procedures, i.e., procedures which always yield Pareto optimal (but not
necessarily stable) outcomes, which do not give players any incentive to misrepresent
their preferences.

THEOREM 4. Efficient matching procedures exist for which truthful revelation of
preferences is a dominant strategy for every agent.

PROOF. Consider the procedure which, for any stated preference profile P, yields

the outcome f(P) = x in which x(ml) is the most preferred partner of ml, and x(mk)

is the most preferred partner of mk in the set WI{x(ml), ... , x(mk_)} for

k = 1, .. ., m. That is, this procedure matches mI with his (stated) first choice, m2 with

his (stated) first choice of the remaining wi, and so forth. Truthful revelation of
preferences is clearly a dominant strategy for the men, and it is also a (degenerately)
dominant strategy for the women, whose preferences have no influence on the
outcome of this procedure (which bears some resemblance to the football draft).
Although the outcome f(P) need not be stable, it is always Pareto optimal with respect
to P, since at any other outcome some man would do worse. This completes the proof.

So there are matching procedures which always yield stable outcomes, and there are
efficient matching procedures in which truthful revelation is a dominant strategy for

every agent, but no matching procedure exists which meets both these requirements.
However, it is possible to find stable matching procedures which confine any incentive
for misrepresentation to either one of the two sets of agents, and which constrain the
scope for misrepresentation by those players. Specifically, we will prove the following
results, which make use of the fact that Theorem 1 permits us to identify, for each set

of agents, a unique optimal stable outcome, which they each like at least as well as any
other stable outcome.

THEOREM 5. In the matching procedure which always yields the optimal stable

outcome for a given one of the two sets of agents (i.e., for M or for W), truthful revelation
is a dominant strategy for all the agents in that set.

624

ALVIN E. ROTH

COROLLARY 5.1. In the matching procedure which always yields the optimal stable
outcome for a given set of agents, the agents in the other set have no incentive to
misrepresent their first choice.

Note that both results are phrased in terms of "the" matching procedure which
yields a particular outcome. There are obviously different procedures which yield the
same outcome, but from the point of view of incentivies such procedures are equivalent, and can be regarded as a single procedure. Note also that Theorem 5 implies that,
although an agent can in general change the set of stable outcomes by misrepresenting
his preferences, no agent can manipulate his preferences in such a way that he prefers
his best outcome in the altered set of stable outcomes to his best outcome in the

original set of stable outcomes. The next section is devoted to the proof of thes
results, which is somewhat more complex than the proof of the earlier results.
presents some additional results about the structure of the set of stable outcom

which arise in the course of the proofs.

5. Proofs of Theorem 5 and its corollary. In this section it will be shown that t
repeated proposal procedure G used in the proof of Theorem 1 has the propertie
stated in Theorem 5 and Corollary 5.1. As discussed in section 2, to establish the
results for the general matching problem with strict preferences, it will be sufficient

demonstrate them for the marriage problem. Throughout this section, therefore, t
sets of agents will be M = { m .. . . , m} and W = (w, . . . , w }, the true preferenc
of the players will be given by the arbitrary preference profile P, and x = g(P) w
denote the outcome which results from the repeated proposal procedure when the true
preferences are stated.

To prove Theorem 5, we need to show that truthful revelation is a dominant strategy

for each mi in M. Since the (true) preference profile P is arbitrary, it will be sufficien
to show that, if P' is a preference profile which differs from P only in that P'(mi), say

replaces man m,'s true preferences P(mi), then man mi doesn't prefer the outco
y = g(P') to x = g(P). That is, we need to show that no successful misrepresentati

of preferences is possible, where a misrepresentation P'(mi) is defined to be

successful misrepresentation by man mi if y(mi)P(mi)x(mi). That is, a misrepres
tation P'(mi) is successful if mi prefers (according to his true preferences) the partner

y(m,) he's matched with when he misrepresents his preferences to the partner x(m
he's matched with when he states his true preferences. (Throughout this section
y = g(P') will denote an outcome resulting from misrepresentation by mi.)

We first show that only a certain kind of simple misrepresentation need

considered, since if any successful manipulation is possible, then it can be achieved
a simple misrepresentation. Specifically, if P'(mi) is an arbitrary misrepresentation
discussed above, then an equivalent simple misrepresentation P"(mi) is one in whic

y(mi)P"(mi)wj for all wj #y(mi). That is, P"(mi) is a preference relation which ha
y(m,) as the most preferred match of mi,. The justification for calling P"(mi) an
equivalent misrepresentation to P'(mi) is given by the following lemma, which sta

that mi will end up matched to the same partner, y(m), whether he misrepresents usin

P'(mi) or P"(mi). (The preference profile P", of course, denotes the one which diffe
from P only in that P"(mi,) replaces P(mi).

LEMMA 1. If y = g(P') and z = g(P") then z(mi) = y(mi).

PROOF. The outcome y is stable with respect to the preference profile P" (i.e., y
in C(P")), since y is in C(P') and since no new potential instabilities for y arise in
changing from P' to P". So y(mi) is "possible" for mi under the preference profile
in the sense defined in the proof of Theorem 2. Since y(mi) is mi's most prefer

match according to P "(m), it is the best possible match for mi with respect to P". But,

ECONOMICS OF MATCHING STABILITY & INCENTIVES

625

by Theorem 2, z = g(P") gives every man his best possible match with r

profile P", and so z(mi) = y(mi) as was to be proved.

So Lemma 1 shows that, to prove Theorem 5, it is sufficient to prove that

misrepresentation P'(mi) (i.e., no manipulation in which mi proposes to y
of G(P')) can be successful. The following lemma states that if a misrepr

mi leaves mi at least as well off as at x = g(P), then no man will suffer, i.e.,

likes the outcome y = g(P') resulting from the misrepresentation at least
outcome x = g(P).

LEMMA 2. If P'(mi) is a simple misrepresentation such that y = g(P') and either
y(m)P(mi)x(mi) or y(mi)= x(mi) then, for each mj in M, either y(mj)P(mj)x(mj) or

y(mj) = x(mj).
PROOF. Suppose, to the contrary, that x(mj)P(mj)y(mj) for some mj in M, i.e., mj

does worse in the outcome y than in x. Since every agent other than mi states the same

preferences in the profiles P and P', it must be that mj is rejected by x(mj) at some

step of the procedure G(P'). Let 1 be the first step of G(P') at which some mj is
rejected by x(mj). Then x(mi) must have received a proposal in step / of G(P') from
some mk who did not propose to her in G(P), such that mkP(x(mj))mJ, i.e., from an mk

who x(mj) prefers to mj. The fact that mk didn't propose to x(mj) in G(P) means
x(mk)P(mk)x(mj), and so mk must have been rejected by x(mk) in G(P') prior to step
1, which contradicts the choice of 1 as the first such period. Consequently, no mj is
rejected by x(mj) in G(P'), which completes the proof.
We can now proceed to prove Theorem 5, by showing that no man can successfully
misrepresent his preferences in the repeated proposal procedure (in which men do the
proposing).

PROOF OF THEOREM 5. Let x = g(P), and suppose that x results from the repeatedproposal procedure in t steps, i.e., G(P) terminates at step t. Let P' be the preference
profile which results from P when one agent, mi, makes a simple misrepresentation to

obtain y = g(P'). We want to show that this misrepresentation cannot be successful,
and we will proceed by assuming that either y(mi)P(mi)x(mi) or y(mi) = x(mi) and
then showing that only the latter alternative can occur. That is, we consider only
manipulations which don't actually harm the manipulator, and then show that they
don't help him either.

For any mj in M, say that m. makes a match at step k of G(P) if mj proposes to his
ultimate partner x(mj) at step k. Note that each mj makes a match exactly once.
Now we will show that, for any mj who makes a match at period t of G(P) (the final
period), y(mj) = x(mj). This follows from the fact that, since t was the final step of
G(P), mj was the only man who proposed to x(mj) in G(P) (since otherwise at least
one more step would have occurred). But, by Lemma 2, no man does worse at y than

at x, so no man proposes to x(mj) in G(P') who didn't propose to x(mj) in G(P).
Consequently only mj proposes to x(mj) in G(P') (since x(mj) receives at least one
proposal), and soy(mj) = x(mj). The same conclusion holds for any mj who is the only
one to propose to x(mj) in G(P), regardless of the period at which he makes his match.
So if the manipulator mi made a match at the final step t of G(P), or if he made a
match with someone who received no other proposals in G(P), then his manipulation
can't be successful, and we're done.

Suppose instead that the manipulator mi makes a match at some other step k of

G(P) (1 < k < t). We will show by induction that, for every mj (including mi) who
makes a match at step k or later, y(mj) = x(mj).

Let r be a step of G(P) such that k < r < t. We have already demonstrated the
desired conclusion for any mj who makes a match at step t. The inductive part of th

proof is to show that, if y(mj) = x(mj) for every mj who makes a match at steps r +

626

ALVIN E. ROTH

through t of G(P), then y(mj) = x(mj) for every mj who makes a matc

G(P).

Let mq be a man who makes a match at step r of G(P). Let M' be the subset of men

who were rejected by x(mq) in G(P), i.e., M' = {m in MIx(mq)P(mj)x(mj)} is the

subset of men mj who prefer x(mq) to their ultimate partner. If M' is empty, then
y(mq) = x(mq) by the argument of the previous paragraph. If not, let mu be the man in
M' such that muP(x(mq))ms for all ms other than ma in M'. That is, mu is preferred by

x(mq) to all the other men she rejected in G(P).
Then mu makes his match after step r of G(P), since he's not rejected by x(mq) until

step r. So y(mu) = x(mu) by the inductive hypothesis.
Since mu isn't the manipulator (i.e., mu # mi), this means that mu proposes to x(mq)

in G(P') and is rejected in favor of someone who x(mq) prefers. But since no man
proposes to x(mq) in G(P') who didn't also propose to her in G(P), this means that

x(mq) rejects mu in favor of mq, so y(mq) = x(mq). Thus, by induction, y(m) = x(mj
for every mj who makes a match at step k or later. In particular, y(mi) = x(mi), so the

manipulation is not successful. This completes the proof.
To prove Corollary 5.1, it is sufficient to note that, since the repeated proposal
procedure has men proposing and women accepting or rejecting, the only opportunit
for misrepresentation which a woman has is to reject a more preferred man in favor of
someone less preferred at some step of the procedure. Theorem 3 showed that this can

sometimes lead to a more preferable final match, but obviously if some wj receives a

proposal at any step of the procedure from her first choice, she can do no better than
to accept, which establishes Corollary 5.1.

6. Further results. Note that Theorem 5 and its proof leave open the possibility
that men who make a match before mi may profit from his misrepresentation, even
though mi cannot himself gain any benefit from misrepresentation. The following
example shows that this is indeed possible. Let M= {m,,m2,m3} and W= {wl,W2,
W3), with preferences

P(ml): w2PlwlP1W3, P(wl): mlPIm2P1m3,
P(m2): wIP2w2P2w3, P(w2): m3P2mlP2m2,
P(m3): WIP3W2P3w3, P(w3): mlP3m2P3m3
Then g(P) = [(mI, wl), (m2, w3), (m3, w2)].
If m2 misrepresented his preferences as P'(m2): w3P2wlP2w2 then

g(P) = [(m, 2), (m2, W3), (m3, W)]

which leaves m2 no worse than at g(P), but which benefits mi and m3.
Another consequence of the argument used to establish Theorem 5 is the following
result, which compares the best stable outcome for the men with the set of all feasible
outcomes (stable or not).

THEOREM 6. No feasible outcome is strictly preferred by all mi in M to the outcome g(P).

The fact that no stable outcome is strictly preferred to g(P) isn't news: Theorem 2
gives a stronger result. What Theorem 6 says is that in fact, g(P) is weakly Pareto
optimal from the point of view of the men, with respect to any possible outcome. The

example above shows that this can't be strengthened to strong Pareto optimality.
PROOF OF THEOREM 6. I am indebted to David Gale for pointing out that the proof
follows almost immediately from the observation (in the proof of Theorem 5) that if mj

makes a match in the final period t of G(P), then x(mj) receives only one proposal in
G(P). So if y is any outcome which mj prefers to x (i.e., y(mj)P(m1)x(mj)) then some

ECONOMICS OF MATCHING STABILITY & INCENTIVES

627

other mi :P mj must be matched with x(mj) at y (i.e., y(mi) = x(mj)).
mi didn't propose to x(mj) in G(P) means mi prefers x(mi) to x(mj),

the proof.

Taken together, Theorems 3 and 5 and Corollary 5.1 provide boun
misrepresentation we can hope to preclude in any stable matching p

3 shows that it isn't possible to remove all incentive for misre

Theorem 5 shows that such incentives can be removed from one of the two sets of

agents, and Corollary 5.1 shows that the incentive to misrepresent can simultaneo

be somewhat constrained in the other set of agents. In fact, the procedure discussed in
Theorem 5 and its corollary take us as far as we can go in this direction. The followin
result formalizes the sense in which this is the case.

THEOREM 7. No stable matching procedure exists which never gives any agent an
incentive to misrepresent his kth choice, for k -# 1.

PROOF. The result follows from the proof of Theorem 3. Examples of the kind used
there can obviously be constructed, such that an agent in one of the two sets will have

an incentive to misrepresent his kth choice, for any k > 1.

7. Discussion. The theorems presented in ??3, 4 and 6 demonstrate that the
structure of the matching problem allows powerful conclusions to be drawn about the
set of possible outcomes and the procedures which can be used to select a particular
outcome. Consider, for example, the matching problem which involves students and
colleges; specifically, the problem of matching students with the colleges at which they

will matriculate.

Theorem 1 shows that the set of stable outcomes is nonempty, so that, when the
preferences of students for colleges and colleges for students are known, it is always
possible to assign students to colleges in a way which gives colleges the incentive to
admit the students they were assigned, and students the incentive to attend the college

to which they were assigned, since neither can hope to find a more preferable match.
Furthermore, Theorem 2 shows that the set of stable outcomes has a structure which

reflects common interests of students or of colleges. It is somewhat surprising that
common interests of this kind can be identified, since the nature of the problem is that
students compete with each other for the best (i.e., the most widely preferred) colleges,

and colleges compete with each other for the best students. But when attention is
confined to the set of stable outcomes, these causes of competition and conflicting
interests disappear, and all students have a common interest in the "student-optimal"
stable outcome, while all colleges prefer the "college-optimal" stable outcome. Theorem 6 shows that this common interest is not in conflict with the requirement of
stability, i.e., even if stability were not required, students could not all do better than
the student optimal stable outcome.

A similar structure remains when, in ?4, the assumption that the preferences are
known is abandoned. Although Theorem 3 shows that it isn't possible to find a stable
matching procedure which doesn't potentially give some agent an incentive to misrepresent his preferences, Theorem 5 shows that it is possible to confine this incentive to

misrepresent to either one of the two sets of agents. This latter result suggests that,
despite the result of Theorem 3, it may be possible to largely avoid the distortions
introduced by misrepresentation in matching problems like the problem of matching
students and colleges, in which one set of agents consists of institutions rather than

individuals. 13

13In certain respects this result may have some resemblance to the results of Wilson (1978) concerning
competitive exchange markets in which one player is assigned the role of the passive auctioneer.

628

ALVIN E. ROTH

In particular, suppose that the matching procedure is used which yields

optimal stable assignment of students to colleges, and which gives n
incentive to misrepresent his preferences. Since it is a dominant strategy for each

student to reveal his true preferences, the only potential source of distortion of the

procedure lies in the stated preferences of the colleges. But the preferences of colleges
(and institutions in general) are likely to be much more regular than the preferences of
students (and individuals in general), so that colleges may have less scope for
(undetectable) misrepresentation. For example, the kinds of preferences which colleges
may exhibit are already influenced by legislation and regulation designed to eliminate
racial discrimination. The enforcement of these laws and regulations presupposes that

the preferences exercised by a college can be examined (e.g., through litigation) with
sufficient reliability to determine which choices result from "legitimate" preferences
and which from discriminatory preferences. And, to the extent that colleges rank
students through objective criteria like grades or exam scores, the degree to which
"strategic" opportunities arise from misrepresentation of preferences over other factors
is reduced.

References
[1] Crawford, Vincent P. and Knoer, Elsie Marie. (1981). Job Matching with Heterogeneous Firms and
Workers. Econometrica 49 437-450.

[2] Dasgupta, Partha, Hammond, Peter and Maskin, Eric. (1979). The Implementation of Social Choice
Rules: Some General Results on Incentive Compatibility. Rev. Econom. Stud. XLVI 185-216.

[3] Dubins, L. E. and Freedman, D. A. (1980). Machiavelli and the Gale-Shapley Algorithm. Mimeo.
[4] Gale, David and Shapley, Lloyd S. (1962). College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage. Amer.
Math. Monthly 69 9-15.
[5] Gibbard, Allan. (1973). Manipulation of Voting Schemes: A General Result. Econometrica 41
587-601.

[6] Kalai, Ehud and Muller Eitan. (1977). Characterization of Domains Admitting Nondictatorial Soci
Welfare Functions and Nonmanipulable Voting Procedures. J. Econom. Theory 16 456-469.
[7] Knuth, Donald. (1976). Mariages Stables. Les Presses de l'Universit6 de Montreal.
[8] Maskin, Eric. (1976). On Strategy Proofness and Social Welfare Functions When Preferences
Restricted. Mimeo, Harvard University.

[9] Ritz, Ziv. (1981). On Arrow Social Welfare Functions and on Nonmanipulable and Noncorrupti
Social Choice Functions. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Northwestern University.
[10] . (1982). Incentives and Stability in Some Two-Sided Economic and Social Models. Mimeo.
[11] Satterthwaite, Mark. (1975). Strategy-Proofness and Arrow's Conditions: Existence and Correspondence Theorems for Voting Procedures and Social Welfare Functions. J. Econom. Theory 10.
[12] Wilson, Robert. (1978). Competitive Exchange. Econometrica 46 577-585.
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS, URBANA,
ILLINOIS 61801

