Addressing Discretization-Induced Bias in Demographic
Prediction
Evan Dong1 , Aaron Schein2 , Yixin Wang3 , and Nikhil Garg4

arXiv:2405.16762v1 [cs.CY] 27 May 2024

1

Cornell University, zed5@cornell.edu
University of Chicago, schein@uchicago.edu
3
University of Michigan, yixinw@umich.edu
4
Cornell Tech, ngarg@cornell.edu

2

May 28, 2024
Abstract
Racial and other demographic imputation is necessary for many applications, especially in auditing
disparities and outreach targeting in political campaigns. The canonical approach is to construct continuous predictions – e.g., based on name and geography – and then to discretize the predictions by
selecting the most likely class (argmax). We study how this practice produces discretization bias. In
particular, we show that argmax labeling, as used by a prominent commercial voter file vendor to impute
race/ethnicity, results in a substantial under-count of African-American voters, e.g., by 28.2% points in
North Carolina. This bias can have substantial implications in downstream tasks that use such labels.
We then introduce a joint optimization approach – and a tractable data-driven thresholding heuristic
– that can eliminate this bias, with negligible individual-level accuracy loss. Finally, we theoretically
analyze discretization bias, show that calibrated continuous models are insufficient to eliminate it, and
that an approach such as ours is necessary. Broadly, we warn researchers and practitioners against
discretizing continuous demographic predictions without considering downstream consequences.

1

Introduction

Knowing demographic characteristics of individuals, particularly race and ethnicity, is necessary for many
important applications, for example: auditing disparities such as in lending and policing [Andrus et al., 2021,
Chen et al., 2019, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2014, Edwards et al., 2019, Pierson et al., 2020,
Zhang, 2018], making more fair and accurate decisions in voterfile-based polling and turnout campaigns
[Fraga, 2016a,b, 2018, Grumbach and Sahn, 2020, Hersh, 2015], and decision-making more broadly [DeLuca
and Curiel, 2022, Diamond et al., 2019, Ghosh et al., 2021, Grumbach and Sahn, 2020].
However, individual-level demographic data is not always available, and so researchers and practitioners
impute (i.e., predict) these characteristics using available individual-level data, including in all the abovecited examples. Crucially, both individual-level and aggregate distributional prediction errors matter for
many downstream tasks: in auditing the effect of voter ID laws on voting, for example, classifying a white
individual as Black affects disparity estimates, but so does counting overall fewer Black potential voters in
a geographic area.
The standard approach is: for N individuals, the user observes features x1 , . . . , xN (e.g., name, location)
but not the desired labels y1 , . . . , yN (e.g., race/ethnicity). The user has access to a trained predictive
model q(y, x) ≈ Pr(y | x), for example, Bayesian Improved Surname Geocoding [Elliott et al., 2009], its
We thank David Rothschild, Eliza Hong, Erica Chiang, Eugene Kim, Gabriel Agostini, Sidhika Balachandar, Sophie Greenwood, members of the Cornell AI Policy and Practice Initiative, and anonymous reviewers of the ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency (ACM FAccT) for fruitful conversations and feedback. A version of this paper has been
accepted to the ACM FAccT 2024 conference and will appear as an extended abstract.

1

variants [Chintalapati et al., 2023, Fiscella and Fremont, 2006, Greengard and Gelman, 2024, Imai et al.,
2022, Voicu, 2018], or other machine-learning based approaches [Decter-Frain, 2022, Ghosh et al., 2021, Jain
et al., 2022, Lee et al., 2017]. A downstream task then uses discrete decisions yˆ1 , . . . , ŷN – for example, to
send targeted voter outreach information to individuals based on their predicted demographics, or to audit
whether minoritized individuals are treated disparately.
A large literature thus pursues accurate probability models q(y, x) (Chin et al. [2023] surveys this literature; see also Greengard and Gelman [2024]). Inaccurate models are known to affect downstream tasks
[Decter-Frain et al., 2022]; for example, Baines and Courchane [2014], Zhang [2018] observe that inaccurate
models lead to an over-estimate of disparities that rely on such labels.
We, in contrast, ask: what is the right way for the user to produce individual discrete labels ŷi , given
access to a model that produces continuous q(y, xi )? What are the downstream consequences of different
types of errors caused by the choices? A seemingly obvious choice is to assign for each point the argmax of
its predictive distribution—i.e.,
ŷi ← arg max q(y, xi )
y

for each i. Indeed, this approach is adopted by many users, especially practitioners [Fraga, 2016a, 2018,
Targetsmart, 2022]. While this decision rule seems unassailable for producing a single label, it may lead
to what was recently dubbed argmax bias [Yee et al., 2021] in the algorithmic fairness literature, when the
empirical distribution of decisions overrepresents the most likely label. Intuitively, if a group overall composes
a small fraction of the population, even a Bayesian optimal predictive model may rarely assign plurality
probability for that group, even for individuals of that group. More generally, as we show, discretization
methods have different individual and aggregate error properties, and so one’s discretization method should
depend on the downstream task.
Our empirical context centers on administrative voter records data, (known as voterfile data) in the
United States, which is widely used across academia and industry [Ansolabehere and Hersh, 2011, Barber
and Holbein, 2022, Fraga, 2016b, 2018, Ghitza and Gelman, 2020]. Such data compiles the information
collected by state voter registries and includes demographic information of registered voters, such as race or
gender. Some state registries collect and make available demographic information that is self-reported by
voters, however many do not. As a result, campaigns and academics frequently use imputed race/ethnicity
in tasks such as survey targeting, get-out-the-vote messaging, and measuring disproportionate impacts of
voter roll purges [Hersh, 2015]. We analyze imputed labels in a widely-used commercial voter file from
TargetSmart1 – which essentially uses argmax – as well as the North Carolina voter registry directly.
We find that the algorithmically imputed race/ethnicity of registered voters is substantially skewed white:
e.g., in North Carolina, the algorithmically labeled fraction of African-American voters in the voter file is
28.2% less than the fraction of registered voters who self-report as African-American. This bias is due to
both continuous model miscalibration (16.3% points) and argmax bias (11.9% points). This pattern extends
to every state – argmax discretization undercounts voters of color in 48 out of 50 states in comparison to the
fraction implied by the continuous scores q(y, xi ). Other discretization rules have their own error patterns.
The commonly used threshold rule (only classifying individuals for whom q(y, xi ) ≥ t, e.g., for threshold
t = 80%) [Adjaye-Gbewonyo et al., 2014, Chen et al., 2019, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2014,
Diamond et al., 2019, Pierson et al., 2020]
exacerbates this bias, especially geographic skews, while leaving many points unclassified. Randomizing
decisions (i is labeled as y with probability q(y, xi )) correctly matches the predictive distribution, but is
relatively inaccurate in individual labels.
Next, we introduce optimization-based approaches to generate discrete labels, that construct an integer
program that outputs a label for each data point i, while balancing multiple error objectives. We primarily
consider two objectives: (a) individual data point-level accuracy (labeling each data point according to its
true class) and (b) overall population-level distributional fidelity: where the marginal class distribution of
decisions ŷi should be close to some desired distribution (e.g., the marginal distribution implied by the model
q, or, when available, external data on the true marginal distribution). For example, if two data points each
have a probability 50% for each of the two classes, it may deterministically assign them different labels so
that the overall class balance of decisions is even. Empirically, we find that our approach can eliminate
discretization-induced bias, even without using any information beyond model predictions q(y, x), with a
1 We received a research license to this data from PredictWise, a campaign analytics firm.

2

negligible loss in individual-level accuracy. We further develop an efficient heuristic that can achieve similar
performance, that can be interpreted as a data-driven thresholding approach, informed by the optimization
solutions on a small subset of the data.
Finally, we theoretically characterize decision-making (discretization) bias, as distinct from predictive
modeling bias: how does amplification of the most likely class depend on the properties of the discretization
procedure and the continuous scores, respectively? In Theorem 1, we show that argmax bias emerges even
when the continuous predictive model is itself unbiased (calibrated), and is tightly connected to predictive
uncertainty. In Theorem 2, we analyze decision-making approaches to reduce bias: how should discrete
decisions ŷi be made from a Bayes optimal model of continuous probabilities q(y, xi )? We show that a joint
optimization approach such as ours is necessary for optimal discretization in the presence of a distributional
objective and predictive uncertainty.
Putting things together, we caution against the use of existing discrete labels, as commonly distributed
in commercial voter files, for sensitive applications where such bias would affect results. We further answer
the question: what should a researcher or practitioner do to prevent discretization-induced bias?
(1) When possible, use the continuous scores instead of single discrete labels, as in [Chen et al., 2019,
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2014, DeLuca and Curiel, 2022, Fraga et al., 2023, Kallus et al.,
2022, McCartan et al., 2023]. For example, some auditing tasks can be conducted with sufficiently
calibrated scores. However, for some tasks, such as individual-level outreach decisions, individual-level
discrete decisions might either be required or be easier to integrate into practitioner analysis pipelines.
(2) Improve the continuous model q when possible – e.g., by acquiring more data or changing the modeling
approach. This is the predominant approach pursued in the demographic prediction literature [Chin
et al., 2023]. However, this approach is insufficient. As we make precise in Theorem 1, improving
continuous predictive model accuracy reduces the bias; however, even unbiased Bayes optimal predictors
induce argmax bias, unless predictions have zero error (can perfectly identify the true label for each data
point).
(3) When discretizing, consider the downstream desiderata – e.g., is accuracy among the labeled set most
important, or label representativeness? – and evaluate how label error may affect results. For example,
Fraga [2016a, 2018] count voters by imputed race and account for variance induced by the imputation
process; they further discuss that bias as we measure here would lead to conservative estimates of
differences in voter turnout induced by changes such as redistricting, though do not empirically quantify
the potential effect on the results.
(4) Finally, the optimization-based approaches developed here can flexibly discretize labels that have the
error properties that best match the downstream desiderata. For example, we illustrate approaches that
maximize accuracy while matching group distributions both overall and per geographic subarea.

1.1

Methods and data summary

We briefly summarize our primary methods and data, with additional details in the model and methods
sections. Consider a trained model (such as BISG) that outputs a vector of label probabilities q(xi ) for each
N
data point xi . A (potentially randomized) decision (discretization) rule D : △N
is a rule that, given a
Y →Y
N
set of probability vectors {q(xi )}i=1 associated with N data points, assigns each data point i a label ŷi ∈ Y.
1.1.1

Decision desiderata

There are two high-level desiderata: (1) decision accuracy, i.e., making the correct decision for each data
point; (2) making sure that the distribution of assigned labels {ŷi } matches some desired distribution, a
notion that we will capture both via (a) the bias for each class y and (b) full distributional fidelity. For
example, we may want to assign a correct demographic label for each potential voter (for more effective
personalized get-out-the-vote campaigns) but also have the overall label distribution match the demographic
makeup of the state so that we’re not under-counting minoritized groups when conducting overall analyses.
(1) To measure of decision accuracy, we use (one minus the) 0-1 loss, i.e., given true labels yi and
PN
decisions ŷi : acc(y1:N , ŷ1:N ) = N1 i I [ŷi = yi ] .
3

(2a) To measure bias, we use the distance between the marginal distribution of labels and a reference
distribution pref . Let p̂marg (y) denote the fraction of datapoints with the label y:
N

p̂marg (y, ŷ1:N ) =

1 X
1[ŷi = y].
N i=1

Then, bias is how much a class y is amplified by labels relative to the reference:
bias(y, ŷ1:N , pref ) ≜ p̂marg (y, ŷ1:N ) − pref (y).
(2b) As a summary statistic, we will further consider distributional fidelity, the negative sum of the
absolute value of bias across classes (equivalently, the negative of the ℓ1 distance between the label and
reference distributions).
X
bias(y, ŷ1:N , pref ) .
fid(pref , ŷ1:N ) ≜ −
y∈Y

Aggregate posterior reference distribution What is an appropriate reference distribution pref ? Of
course, if we knew the true distribution of labels (e.g., the true fraction of each group in the voter file), we
could measure and optimize fidelity with respect to it. However, this information is not often known. In this
paper, we will thus primarily compare to the aggregate posterior: for a given set {xi }, what would the
decision distribution be if we could make continuous decisions corresponding to the continuous classifier q,
pqagg (y, {xi }) =

1 X
q(y, xi ).
N i

When q is Bayes optimal, this choice counts the “correct” number of decisions for each class if one was not
forced to make discrete decisions, and approaches the true distribution Pr(y) as N → ∞. This approach thus
(1) isolates bias due to the discretization process as opposed to miscalibration in the continuous classifier q;
(2) can be optimized for and empirically measured, given predictions from q; i.e., this approach requires no
more information than the argmax rule.
Notably, one can also calculate conditional aggregate posteriors – for example, the fraction of labels for
each group within each county, if we observe such geographic information for each data point.
1.1.2

Overview of decision rules

Several rules are used in academia and in practice:
Argmax rule assigns, for each data point, the most likely2 class: Dargmax ({q(xi }) ≜ {ŷi = arg maxy q(y, xi )}.
Threshold at t rule assigns a label only if the argmax class has a probability of at least t, i.e., ŷi =
arg maxy q(y, xi ) if maxy q(y, xi ) ≥ t, otherwise i is left uncoded.
Thompson sampling for each data point i, samples a class y based on the probabilities q(y, xi ), i.e., ŷi = y
with probability q(y, xi ), and so in expectation will have labels matching the aggregate posterior.
These rules are all independent: the assigned label for a data point i depends on q(xi ) but not on other
data points or their probability vectors {q(xj )}j̸=i .
In contrast, our proposed approach also includes joint decision optimization rules, which depend on the
entire set of data points, as a solution to discretization bias.
2 Suppose ties are broken according to some consistent ordering over the classes.
In the event of ties, we will use
arg maxy q(y, x) to denote the single class that is in the argmax set and is first in the consistent ordering among classes
in the argmax set.

4

(a) Argmax

(b) Threshold at probability 0.8

(c) Thompson Sampling

(d) Aggregate Posterior matching

Figure 1: Comparison of different discretization methods. Each subfigure shows a 3-dimensional probability
simplex, where individual points are colored according to the label assigned by the corresponding method. For
example, in (a), all the blue points are assigned the Caucasian label, which has the highest class probability
according to the continuous model q for that data point. We use a sample of points from the voter file, and
Hispanic, Asian, and Native American probabilities are aggregated into Other. Our approach in Figure 1d
(posterior matching) matches the class distribution while maintaining individual data point level accuracy.
Integer optimization rules directly optimize given objectives. We consider the rule that corresponds to
solving the following optimization problem, for a given γ, data points {xi }, and reference pref :
!
N
1 X
γ
D ({q(xi )}, pref ) = arg max{ŷi } γ
q(ŷi , xi ) + (1 − γ)fid(pref , ŷ1:N ).
(1)
N i=1
The rule balances, parameterized by γ ∈ [0, 1], row-level scores (accuracy as measured by q) and
distributional fidelity.
Aggregate posterior matching A special case of the joint optimization decision rules defined in Equation (1) is as γ → 0, leading to a rule that maximizes accuracy subject to the constraint that distributional fidelity be as high as possible. We call such rules matching solutions, e.g., aggregate posterior
5

matching. For our results, we use aggregate posteriors calculated at multiple geographic levels: nationally, throughout a state, or for each County within the state.
Data-driven thresholding heuristic One downside of the optimization based approaches is that they
may be computationally expensive for large datasets (requiring an integer constrained variable for
each data point). Thus, we develop and evaluate the following heuristic: solve the integer optimization
for a tractable batch of data. Then, on that batch, train a machine learning model with features
being the scores q(y, xi ) and the labels being the optimization outputs ŷi . Finally, apply this model
to the rest of the dataset. Once trained, this approach is as simple as existing thresholding or argmax
approaches, and so we refer to it a data-driven thresholding heuristic (with vector thresholds implicitly
defined by the machine learning model). In this work, we train this approach to approximate the
aggregate posterior matching solution and integer programs.
Figure 1 illustrates, for several decision rules, labels as a function of the class probabilities. Intuitively,
like Thompson sampling, aggregate posterior matching assigns a proportional number of data points to each
class, which may require individual points to not be labeled by its most likely class. However, its labels are
more in line with argmax labeling than is Thompson sampling.
1.1.3

Data and code

We evaluate a widely used commercial data file that provides both predicted continuous race/ethnic probabilities and a single discrete generated label for each individual. The voter file provides continuous probabilities
for people along K = 5 predicted race/ethnicity categories: African-American, Asian, Caucasian, Hispanic,
and Native American.3 The labels also include an Uncoded category. Crucially, according to both the data
dictionary and verified by us, the discrete labels are derived using the argmax rule, except for the Uncoded
category.4
In our main text analysis, we relabel these Uncoded points via the argmax rule.5
We analyze the universe of available predictions and state voter files (N = 261,547,234) across all 50 states
and the District of Columbia. Furthermore, some states (such as North Carolina) additionally make available
each voter’s self-identified race/ethnicity, as filled in on the voter registration form. Our data includes this
information where available alongside the algorithmically generated predictions and discrete labels; in some
of our analyses, we use self-report data as ground truth labels 6 to measure true accuracy and to calculate
a ground truth reference distribution pref (y). For these analyses in the main text, we filter our dataset of
model predictions to include North Carolina only. This analysis contains N = 6,374,636 individuals, after
excluding the 2,312,356 individuals in NC without self-reported race and the 138,541 voters who self-report
race as Other.7 In the Appendix, we replicate our primary analyses using fully public data and predictive
modeling methods from Greengard and Gelman [2024], as well as for other states in the commercial voter
file. Our code is available at https://github.com/evan-dong/demographic-prediction-argmax-bias.

6

Aggregate Posterior
Data-Driven Threshold

0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

Miscalibration Error

0.02
0.04

Discretization Bias

0.06
0.075
0.100
0.125

e
n-Am
Africa

rican Hispanic

can
sian
Ameri Cauca
ative

Asian

DC
0.02

HI
NM

0.00

NY
0.02

PA
MI
VT
OH MACT
IA
RI
MT MN OR AR
WV SD KS WA
KY
WI

0.04

AL
NC
DE VA

TX

0.844
0.842

NV

0.786

Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Integer Program
Data-Driven Threshold
Top-k Sampling

0.784
0.782

0.06

0.780
0.778
0.776

0.08

OK
AK

N

0.0

(a) Differences in predicted and
self-reported counts in NC.

MD
IL LA MS
GA
USA FLNJ
AZ

0.846
CA

Accuracy

0.15
0.10
0.08

Bias (Difference when Discretized)

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Threshold at 0.8
Commercial (Argmax)

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.15

0.14

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

Ground Truth Fidelity

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.5

Aggregate Posterior Voter of Color Fraction

(b) Per-state discretization bias.

(c) Accuracy versus Fidelity of
rules in NC.

Figure 2: Bias (undercounting of voters of color) in the voter file. (a) In North Carolina where ground truth
self-reported data is available, the difference in counts for each group between each discretization method
and the ground truth. The argmax method substantially undercounts African Americans in particular, with
threshold methods further magnifying such bias. The bar marked “Aggregate Posterior” corresponds to
the bias of both Thompson Sampling and Aggregate method; as these methods directly reflect proportions
from the continuous model, its undercounting is due to the model’s miscalibration. The additional bias of
argmax is thus the bias caused by discretizing the model scores. (b) In all states plus Washington, DC, the
discretization bias (difference between the fraction of voters of color in the discrete labels and the aggregation
posterior fraction). Points below the horizontal line indicate a comparative underrepresentation of voters of
color compared to the aggregate posterior – only in DC, Hawaii, and New Mexico does the discretization lead
to an increase of the count of voters of color. Note that in DC and Hawaii, Caucasian is not the most common
class: African Americans (DC) and Asian (HI) are, respectively, and these classes are over-represented by
argmax. New Mexico (NM) is the one exception where the argmax decision rule under-represents the most
common class compared to the aggregate posterior. In (b), some similarly clustered states are left unlabeled
for visual clarity, and the overall effect in full voter file is marked in orange. In (c), we plot the performance
of different decision rules according to our two metrics. Notice that our optimization-based rules Paretodominate the sampling approach, and that the data-driven threshold approximates the full curve of integer
programs quite closely.

2

Empirical Results

Discretization bias and Voter of Color Representation Argmax labeling substantially undercounts
voters of color. Figure 2a shows – for North Carolina voters for whom self-identified labels are available –
the bias (relative count) of each decision rule compared to this ground truth. Every group except Caucasian
is under-counted by the argmax rule, and this under-counting is substantial. The predicted population
differs by over four hundred thousand African-American voters out of a self-reported population count of
1,447,516; i.e., the discrete labels count over 28% fewer African Americans than self-reported figures. More
3 These categories are imperfect, do not disambiguate race from ethnicity, are socially constructed, and there is large uncaptured granular variation; to the extent that demographic-based analyses are important, we support the collection of more
granular, self-reported data [Hanna et al., 2020, Kauh et al., 2021, Movva et al., 2023, Read et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2022].
We note that the voter file data treats Hispanic as mutually exclusive with racial categories, and furthermore that racial
self-identification as Native American differ from legal tribal citizenship.
4 The data dictionary states that an individual is marked as Uncoded when the model is not confident enough to make a
prediction. From our analyses, it seems that the process of an individual being Uncoded cannot be simply described or reverse
engineered as a threshold based rule; some uncoded rows have individual class probabilities of over 90 percent. We believe that
validation from external data sources may play a role in an individual being Uncoded.
5 We replicate all results in Appendix C.5 when we instead exclude these voters. As Uncoded data points are disproportionately predicted in probability to be voters of color, excluding these makes the population less diverse, increasing measured bias;
results are qualitatively identical.
6 Though we refer to these self-report labels as ground truth, we note that prior work has found that individuals may not be
consistent in their reporting over time [Fraga, 2016a].
7 Of course, excluding such individuals from consequential analyses could introduce further bias, speaking to the fraught
nature of demographic imputation and coarse racial/ethnic data.

7

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.928
0.846
0.844
0.841
0.841
0.834
0.776

Threshold at 0.8 (67.9% not dropped)
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold Matching Heuristic
County-Conditional Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling

Fidelity to
Ground Truth
-0.352
-0.079
-0.150
-0.074
-0.074
-0.074
-0.074

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior
-0.293
-0.019
-0.091
-0.000
-0.002
-0.000
-0.000

Table 1: In North Carolina, the performance of different decision-making discretization rules. Fidelity is
compared both to the true marginal distribution (i.e., the self-reported voter population) and the aggregate
posterior; differences between the two reflect probabilistic score miscalibration. Both sampling-based approaches are strictly dominated by joint decision-making rules, which achieve equal or better fidelity with
substantially better accuracy. Furthermore, both matching approaches substantially improve on distributional fidelity (to either ground truth or aggregate posterior) than the argmax rule, with negligible loss in
accuracy. Note that the aggregate posterior matching approach in particular uses no more data than the
argmax approach. Metrics for the threshold rule are calculated only on labeled points, dropping 32.1% of
the dataset.

precisely, compared to ground truth population distribution for each group, the labeled distribution has fewer
African-American (−28.2%), Asian (−20.1%), Hispanic (−14.9%), and Native American (−32.8%) voters
while inflating the Caucasian population by +10.1%. Furthermore, a large source of this undercounting is
due to the discretization rule (argmax) in addition to miscalibration in the continuous classifier. As the
predictions from Thompson Sampling and Aggregate Posterior Matching avoid this discretization bias, our
framework allows a comparison of the two sources: the continuous classifier’s miscalibration causes 16.3%
of the undercounting, with the remaining 11.9% caused by argmax discretization. (The classifier calibration
curves using NC data are given in Appendix Figure 7).
These patterns extend to the other states. Since we do not have self-identified ground truth labels in every
state, Figure 2b compares the fraction of voters labeled as a person of color8 (any label except Caucasian) by
the vendor, versus the aggregate posterior fraction according to the same vendor’s continuous probabilities.
In nearly every state, the fraction of people labeled as a person of color is less than the aggregate posterior
– i.e., the argmax discretization rule comparatively undercounts people of color everywhere except New
Mexico, Hawai’i, and DC. Notice the general trend in voter of color representation: the larger the white
majority population, the larger the discretization bias.
Mitigating bias with optimization-based decision rules These biases can be mitigated via changing
the discretization rule, with negligible loss in individual-level accuracy. Figure 2a shows that matching to
the aggregate posterior (which does not require any more information than argmax) substantially reduces
bias, and Figure 2c shows accuracy versus fidelity to the ground truth for each rule. Table 1 lists, for each
decision rule, the accuracy with respect to the ground truth as well as distributional fidelity to both the
ground truth distribution and the aggregate posterior (additional rules are shown in 5).
Remarkably, our joint optimization-based rules have similar accuracy as the argmax rule (0.36% more
0-1 loss), with substantially less bias (from 15% to 7.4% with respect to ground truth). This is true for
the matching rules (that exactly match the distribution implied by the continuous models), the data-driven
thresholding heuristic, and integer optimization rules that balance accuracy and distributional fidelity. Furthermore, the sampling-based approaches are highly suboptimal: Thompson sampling is substantially less
accurate, with comparable distributional fidelity and bias to the joint rules.
Two aspects of the results are especially striking. (1) Our optimization-based decision rules outperform
standard rules even though they are not given the true marginal distribution over classes, i.e., when it uses
8 While defining the boundaries of race and whiteness is always contentious, given the data at hand and these commercially
used labels, our operational definition of voters of color includes Hispanic voters of any race.

8

Commercial (Argmax)

1.0

0.15

0.8

Threshold at 0.8

Caucasian Population

True Caucasian Population
0.6

Thompson Sampling

0.05

0.00

0.4

Aggregate Posterior Matching

Caucasian Population Bias

0.10

0.05

0.10

0.2

County-Conditional Aggregate Posterior Matching
0.15

0.0

(a) Voter file population.

(b) Bias compared to per-county aggregate posterior.

Figure 3: Per-county Caucasian bias in North Carolina, under different discretization methods – the underrepresentation of voters of color (i.e., bias overrepresenting the white population) when compared to the
aggregate posterior. The most commonly used methods of thresholding and argmax further cause geographic
skews – in many parts of the state, very few rows are classified as non-Caucasian, and the bias is largest
in counties with an already skewed population. In contrast, Thompson sampling and County-conditional
aggregate posterior matching have no bias when compared to the aggregate posterior.
just the information given by the continuous classifier (and so can be implemented in every state, even
when true population information is not available, just like the argmax rule). (2) Even the extreme fidelityprioritizing choice of γ → 0 optimized by the matching approaches induces negligible accuracy loss, and so
it seems appropriate for any downstream application (and notably, it is the opposite choice than the implicit
γ = 1 choice made by the current argmax approach).
Together, these results show that commercial voter files undercount voters of color, and this undercounting
can be mitigated simply by changing how vendors convert continuous probabilities to discrete labels.
Geographic skews Finally, we consider sub-state bias. Figure 3 shows, for each county in North Carolina,
the bias (in terms of white voters compared to the aggregate posterior) for each method, as well as the true
fraction of white voters in the voter file.
Argmax and Threshold rules in particular exacerbate geographic differences: majority-white areas are
made even more so through the imputation process. Intuitively, this occurs both because of conditional
geographic miscalibration (models such as BISG use geography, and so a Black voter in a majority-white
area is given a higher white probability than someone with the same name in a majority-Black area) and the
discretization process (as discussed above, argmax and thresholding approaches amplify the majority class).
Such geographic skews may be especially important in discrimination auditing settings, as they may lead
to poor identification of groups in areas where they are especially in the minority and may face the most
discrimination.
As with overall bias, such geography conditional bias can be mitigated with our optimization-based
9

discretization rules, with minimal loss in accuracy. For example, an optimization approach that matches the
aggregate posterior for each county can exactly match each county’s demographic distribution according to
the model, with minimal loss in overall accuracy. (We note, however, that matching overall distributions
without matching to each county can further polarize labels, where most non-white voters are drawn from
counties where such groups live.)
Finally, Figure 3b also illustrates one benefit of Thompson sampling over all other discretization approaches: due to the sampling process, it naturally balances per-sub-group distributions without explicit
optimization. This unbiased property may especially be important in some some auditing or polling settings, despite the individual level inaccuracy.
Result robustness and replication The appendix contains replications using public data and models
from Greengard and Gelman [2024], who produce models from public voter file data that are calibrated for
Caucasian and African Americans – i.e., the aggregate posterior is correct in terms of the fraction of Caucasian
and African American voters. As we theoretically analyze below, we find that even calibrated models
lead to substantial discretization bias using standard approaches. We also show robustness of our results
to alternative analysis choices, discretization methods, and subsets of the data. All results qualitatively
replicate.

3

Theoretical characterization of argmax bias and joint decisionmaking

Motivated by the empirical results, we now characterize decision-making bias, as distinct from predictive
modeling bias: how does amplification of the most likely class depend on the properties of the discretization
procedure and the continuous scores, respectively?
In Theorem 1, we show that discretization bias emerges even when the continuous predictive model is
itself unbiased (calibrated), and is tightly connected to predictive uncertainty.
As intuition, consider the no information regime: if the features provide no additional information over
the overall class probability, then even for the Bayes optimal classifier we have q(y, xi ) = Pr(y) for all i, and
so all points get assigned label ŷi = z, the argmax class. On the other extreme of full information, Bayes
optimal classifiers induce no argmax bias amplification, as they can identify the correct class for each data
point. In the middle, we show that bias amplification is bounded by the mean average error of the continuous
classifier.
In Theorem 2, we analyze decision-making approaches to reduce bias: how should discrete decisions
ŷi be made from a Bayes optimal model of continuous probabilities q(y, xi )? We show that independent
decision-making is necessarily suboptimal in the presence of a distributional objective – any such policy,
even those designed to meet distributional constraints (e.g., Thompson sampling), is Pareto dominated in
terms of expected accuracy and distributional fidelity.
Proofs are in Appendix B.

3.1

Formal definitions

In the model, there is a decision-making (classification) setting with discrete classes y ∈ Y, where |Y| = K ≥
2, with the prior class distribution Pr(y). There are N data points at the decision (test) time. For each data
point i, we observe features xi ∈ X , where the data and the unobserved true label yi are drawn from the
joint distribution (X, Y ) ∼ FXY , where FX , FY are both non-constant. We distinguish between continuous
predictions q(y, xi ) ∈ [0, 1] and discrete decisions ŷi ∈ Y. In our notation, we often omit distribution F . We
also denote a set of data points as x1:N .
3.1.1

Continuous classifier and discretization rules

Suppose we have a machine learning classifier q (e.g., trained on some other dataset) that makes continuous
probability predictions for each class, given the data. Let q(y, x) denote the probability placed on class y

10

given data x. For example, the Bayes optimal classifier is
q ∗ (y, x) ≜ Pr(Y = y|X = x).
We will refer to p as the prior and q as our learned posterior. Let the simplex of possible probability vectors
over the support Y be △Y , and let q(x) ∈ △Y be the vector of probabilities (q(y, x))y .
Continuous classifiers are evaluated via their predictive performance. The expected Mean Absolute
Error (MAE) of the classifier q is:9
# Z
"
X
1 X
(1 − q(yi , xi )) =
(1 − q(y, x)) Pr(y | x)f (x)dx.
MAE(q) = EFXY
N i
X
y∈Y

Decision (discretization) rules are as defined in Section 1.1. Our theoretical results distinguish between
independent (e.g., argmax, threhsolding, Thompson sampling) and joint (e.g., our optimization approach)
rules. Formally, with independent rules, there exists a (potentially randomized) function d such that
Dd ({q(xi )}) = {ŷi = d(q(y, xi ))}.
3.1.2

Formal metrics and Pareto optimal decision-making

For our theoretical results, we consider the expectations of our accuracy, fidelity, and bias metrics, calculated
over the joint distribution of the data FXY over datasets of size N (and any randomness in the decision
rule). The expected accuracy of a decision rule D together with continuous predictor q is thus
ACCN (D, q) = EFXY [acc(y1:N , D({q(xi )}))] .

(2)

Analogously FIDN (D, q, pref ) is the expectation of fidelity and BIASN (y, D, q, pref ) is the expectation of bias.
For a given data distribution F , continuous classifier q, reference distribution pref , and dataset size, we
want to make effective decisions. Given the multiple desiderata, we thus want Pareto optimal decisionmaking, i.e., to adopt a rule D that maximizes, for some γ ∈ (0, 1],
γ
ON
(D, q, pref ) = γACCN (D, q) + (1 − γ)FIDN (D, q, pref ).

(3)

The weight γ is task-dependent, set by a practitioner’s expertise for whether accuracy or distributional
fidelity is more important.
When clear from context, we omit q, pref , and N from the arguments for BIAS, Oγ , ACC, and FID.

3.2

Theoretical Results: Argmax bias and continuous classifier

We first study the relationship between argmax bias and the properties of the continuous classifier. We show
that discretization bias can occur even with unbiased (calibrated) continuous classifiers q, as long as it is
uncertain (has non-zero error).
The following result holds for all calibrated classifiers. A given classifier q is calibrated when its continuous predictions are correct on average, Pr(Y = y|q(y, x) = c) = c.10 Note that the Bayes optimal classifier
is calibrated.
Theorem 1. Argmax bias depends on predictive uncertainty, i.e., how much information features x provide
about the true class label. Consider calibrated classifier q and the argmax decision rule Dargmax . Let N > K
and consider a reference distribution of either the aggregate posterior or the prior. Then,
(i). Suppose x provides no information and q(y, x) = Pr(y) for all x, y. Then, amplification bias is
maximized and all data points are classified as a plurality class:
(
1 − Pr(y), if y = arg maxw p(w),
BIAS(y, Dargmax ) =
− Pr(y),
otherwise.
9 Note that, though related, mean average error of the continuous predictor q(y, x) is not equivalent to expected zero-one
loss of the discrete decisions. The latter, our measure of decision accuracy, also depends on how the continuous predictor is
discretized.
n
o
R
10 For all c of non-zero measure: ∀c ∈
c : (x,y) I[q(y, x) = c]f (x, y)d(y, x) > 0 . Further note that calibration implies

Bayesian consistency, i.e., the continuous model cumulatively assigns the proper mass to each class y: EX [q(y, x)] = Pr(y).

11

(
1,
(ii). Suppose the classifier is perfect, i.e., ∀(x, y) ∼ FXY , we have q(z, x) =
0,
is no amplification bias, BIAS(y, Dargmax ) = 0.

if z = y,
Then, there
otherwise.

(iii). More generally, in the intermediate regime, argmax bias is upper bounded by the predictive error of
the classifier q:
BIAS(y, Dargmax ) ≤ MAE(q).

(4)

The bound is tight: there exist FXY and q such that Equation (4) holds with equality for the plurality
class.
The first two parts directly follow from the definitions. If the features provide no information about Y ,
all decisions are identically the most common class; if the classifier is perfect, then each point is labeled
according to its true class. The proof for the intermediate regime is more involved: we first construct an
example in which bias equals MAE,11 and then show that any setting can be transformed into this example
without violating the inequality.

= 1e-10, MAE = 0.0
= 0.25, MAE = 0.21
= 0.5, MAE = 0.42
= 1, MAE = 0.55
= 2, MAE = 0.61
= 100, MAE = 0.66

0.9
0.8

0.3

Accuracy

Bias (Difference from True Sample)

= 100, MAE = 0.66
= 1, MAE = 0.55
= 0.25, MAE = 0.21

0.4

Information

1.0

Information

0.5

0.2
0.1
0.0

0.7
0.6
0.5

0.1

0.4

0.2

1.0
1/2

1/4

1/8

1/16

1/32

Prior Class Probability Pr(y)

1/32

0.8

0.6

Fidelity

0.4

0.2

0.0

(b) The Pareto curve of optimally-performing decision rules.

(a) The argmax bias for each class.

Figure 4: In simulation, discretized performance and argmax bias of the Bayes optimal classifier as a function
of model accuracy, labeled by generating parameter p and MAE. The results reflect Theorem 1: as classifier
accuracy increases (MAE decreases), argmax bias decreases, and both accuracy and distribution fidelity of
optimal rules increase. Simulation details are described in Section 5.
We illustrate the main ideas of Theorem 1 on a simulated dataset: argmax bias (and more generally,
the entire Pareto curve) depends on classifier accuracy, the MAE.12 Figure 4a shows BIAS(y, Dargmax )
for each class y (labeled with its class probability Pr(y)) as information changes. With little information,
the argmax rule (completely) amplifies the highest probability class, and the bias decreases as classifier
informativeness increases. Notice that in the lowest-accuracy setting, minority classes are missing from the
output distribution entirely. Figure 4b shows the Pareto curves (with the argmax rule on one extreme of each
Pareto curve). As information and therefore classifier accuracy increases, optimal decision-making improves
both decision accuracy and distributional fidelity – as the uncertainty of y given x, as measured by the
expected MAE, decreases, the Pareto curve shifts upwards.
This result clarifies the relationship between bias induced by the continuous model versus the decision
rule. Unlike the bias amplification observed in works such as Leino et al. [2019], argmax bias occurs even for
a calibrated classifier, one that places appropriate mass on each class, due to the threshold nature of argmax
discrete decisions. We note that the observation that perfect accuracy eliminates bias amplification is in the
11 For an argmax class z, we have q(z, x) ∈ { 1 , 1} when D
argmax (q(x)) = z and q(z, x) = 0 otherwise.
K
12 Our data simulation process is described in greater detail in Section 5; in short, we generate datasets with varying correlations

between X and Y and calculate the Bayes optimal posterior q ∗ in closed form.

12

work of Wang and Russakovsky [2021], who further state that accuracy and bias are not always correlated;
Theorem 1(iii) shows that bias is upper bounded by calibrated classifier error and that the bound is tight.
Overall, Theorem 1 suggests that improving model performance – calibrating its predictions, and improving accuracy – is aligned with mitigating argmax bias. However, it is insufficient: any less-than-perfect
continuous model, even if unbiased by itself, can induce biased decisions. Empirically in the Appendix,
we observe this in the voter file setting using the data and models of Greengard and Gelman [2024], who
produce approximately calibrated continuous predictive models that nevertheless undercount voters of color
when discretized.

3.3

Results: Individual discretization versus joint optimization

Above, we study how the continuous classifier’s properties induce discretization bias, when using the argmax
rule. We now study discrete decision-making: given an imperfect but Bayes optimal classifier, how can
we make unbiased decisions? We show that joint decision-making, as in the program in Equation (1), is
necessary for Pareto optimality.
q
For the result, we define the notion of non-trivial reference distributions PN
: a reference distribution
1
to
the
most
likely
class
in
the
dataset, i.e., at least 1
pq : {xi } → △N
is
in
P
if
it
assigns
mass
at
least
N
Y
N
P
data point would be discretized to the most likely class arg maxy i q(y, xi ).13
Theorem 2. Consider Bayes optimal q, and N > K. For all F :
(i). For every γ, pref there exists a joint decision-making rule that maximizes Oγ (D, q, pref ) in Equation (3).
(ii). The argmax decision rule Dargmax maximizes O1 (D, q, pref ), i.e., is accuracy maximizing.
(iii). Dargmax is the only Pareto optimal independent decision rule for non-trivial pref ∈ P. No independent
decision rule D maximizes objective Oγ for any γ, unless γ = 1 and D agrees with Dargmax with
probability 1.
Parts (i) and (ii) follow directly from the classifier being Bayes optimal—maximizing the objective for each
given dataset can be formulated as an integer program, and the argmax rule maximizes expected accuracy
for each data point. To prove part (iii), we show that any other independent rule, with positive probability,
disagrees with argmax on every point in the dataset – and so we can improve both accuracy and fidelity by
switching the decision for at least one point.
Figure 2c visualizes Theorem 2 on the voter file, showing the performance of the various decision rules
that all use the same data and model q. Independent decision rules are substantially Pareto suboptimal
compared to the optimal integer program – except the argmax rule, which optimizes accuracy at substantial
cost of distributional fidelity. Note that in practice, without the Bayes optimal predictor, other decision
rules may outperform and strictly dominate argmax, as seen in the peak of the integer program curve in
Figure 2c. Figure 5 shows results fully congruent with Theorem 2 on simulated data, in the appendix.
We note that the joint decision-making approaches do not necessarily use more information than the
argmax or other independent rules. For example, optimizing fidelity to the aggregate posterior simply
requires the scores q(y, x)—the performance gain comes from jointly making decisions across points. On
the other hand, we note that Theorem 2(ii) does not preclude other rules having higher accuracy than the
argmax rule when the continuous model is not Bayes optimal, as shown in Figure 2c. More generally, it is
possible that, by incorporating domain knowledge such as the expected class distribution when available,
that joint decision-rules can correct for model errors.14
13 This technical condition eliminates the optimality of independent decision rules that trivially allocate every decision to
some arbitrary fixed class, under a reference distribution that requires every point to be allocated to that class regardless of the
continuous predictions q.
14 For example, in Balachandar et al. [2024], external information aids in estimating unbiased continuous predictive models
when outcome data is missing.

13

4

Discussion

Individual-level demographic imputation is a key algorithmic task across important applications. While
much of the literature focuses on improving continuous predictive models, we show the importance of the
next stage of discretizing continuous probabilities into individual labels. In particular, we show that the
standard approaches of argmax and thresholding substantially skew the distribution of labels, especially as
they might correlate with geography, decreasing the fraction of labeled minority groups. We further show
that while increasing predictive modeling accuracy reduces (worst-case) bias, it is generally insufficient to
eliminate such bias, even with perfectly calibrated models. We develop optimization-based discretization
approaches that can match desired class distributions, with negligible loss in accuracy. More generally, we
caution against the use of standard discretization approaches, without considering the error properties that
one’s downstream task requires.
Finally, while our empirical analysis focuses on demographic imputation in voter files, similar considerations appear in many other demographic imputation and algorithmic fairness tasks. For example, matching
to the reference distribution could be interpreted as group fairness in algorithmic fairness settings, if each
label y corresponds to a group, or individual fairness in recommendation settings, if each label corresponds
to an individual producer or item. Our optimization approach is thus related to the approaches of Seymen
et al. [2021] and Zhao et al. [2017], and our work provides a characterization of such approaches, especially supporting joint optimization based approaches over sampling in many applications. We discuss the
connection to this literature further in Appendix A.
Limitations and extensions While we empirically evaluate our optimization-based approach to balance
individual level accuracy and distributional fidelity, the approach is flexible to a range of objectives, such
as precision, group specific false positives, and the count of individuals allocated to each class. Indeed, we
emphasize that the choice of discretization method should be informed by the downstream task for which the
labels will be used, and other considerations such as computational scalability and ethical considerations.
For example, in some auditing tasks, it may be important to have high accuracy among the classified set
(historically used to motivate thresholding approaches), along with geographic representation. In other
settings, having the labels reflect the distribution even of unknown groups (e.g., that a proportional number
of Black individuals who drive a specific type of car are classified as Black) may be more important than
individual-level accuracy, suggesting the use of Thompson sampling. In some settings, it is possible to use
continuous labels directly or to use self-reported demographic data – we recommend doing so when possible.
One limitation of our approach – indeed of much of the demographic imputation literature – is the use
of coarse racial/ethnic categories, and we advocate for methods that better deal with the full complexity
of identity, while respecting privacy considerations. However, the use of more granular categories would
exacerbate argmax bias (since there would be more, smaller probability classes), increasing the importance
of discretization approaches beyond argmax or thresholding.

5

Methodological Details

Argmax The commercial dataset’s presupplied discrete labels did not appear to break ties in any totally
consistent order. As a result, when labeling Uncoded data points (approximately 3.23% of the dataset)
with argmax, we broke ties in the following order: white ≻ African American ≻ Hispanic ≻ Asian≻
Native American, which corresponds to both overall population size and is the least inconsistent with
the provided labels. Tiebreaking has a negligible effect on results; there were a total of 390 such data
points.
Integer optimization We solved integer programs using cvxpy [Diamond and Boyd, 2016], an open-source
Python package, and Gurobi [Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2023], used with a free academic license. In
both simulation and empirical analyses, we calculated γ values between 0.8 and 0.99. Figure 2c uses
increments of 0.01.
Computational considerations in joint rules We note that solving the optimization problem jointly over
the full dataset may be computationally expensive; Seymen et al. [2021] introduce a Lagrangian-based

14

approach. In our empirical application, we solve this optimization problem in evenly sized batches of
approximately 10,000. When using the aggregate posterior conditioned upon geographical location,
these batches are grouped by county instead of completely random selection.
Aggregate posterior matching Matching to an exact distribution (i.e., the fidelity-maximizing one) becomes an assignment problem, solvable in polynomial time as a maximum weight matching problem
on a bipartite graph, as in Abdollahpouri et al. [2023]. We use a bipartite max weight algorithm in
Python to solve this problem, rounding the distribution to the closest integer number of labels to the
fidelity-maximizing distribution.
Data-driven thresholding heuristic We explored several different machine learning models to approximate aggregate posterior matching. Logistic regression, random forests, and support vector machines
all achieve similar performance given one N ≈ 10,000 training batch, with ≈ 99% of predicted labels
being identical to those of the matching solution. Our reported results use a linear SVM, approximating both the aggregate posterior matching solution (Table 1 and Figure 2c) and integer programs
(Figure 2c).
We further evaluate two rules in the Pareto curve diagram Figure 2c and the appendix.
Top-k sampling Top-k sampling is used in many modern applications, including large language models
[Holtzman et al., 2020], and is equivalent to Thompson sampling between just the (renormalized)
probabilities of the top k classes, with the remaining classes set to probability 0.
True marginal population matching In some settings, true aggregate population-level information may
be available or well-estimated (e.g. through the census or surveys), or some other reference distribution
may be chosen given normative motivations. We perform matching using the true makeup of selfreported race to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in utilizing additional information.
Synthetic data generation. Our synthetic data setting for Figures 4 and 5 is designed to illustrate our
main ideas. We use K = 6 classes (i.e., Y = {1 . . . 6}), with the prior frequencies being sequential negative
powers of 2, with the final two classes having equal frequency (i.e., {1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32, 1/32}).
We simulate the features x as a K dimensional vector; each dimension is drawn from a Normal distribution
with variance σ 2 , where the dimension corresponding to the true y has mean 1 and the remaining dimensions
have mean 0. Thus the variance σ 2 characterizes the informativeness of the data (lower σ means lower
predictor MAE of the Bayes optimal classifier q ∗ (y, x) = Pr(y|x)). We note that this choice makes it easy
to calculate the Bayes optimal classifier and to sample data. Data are generated by first sampling y1:5000
from the prior, and then sampling x1:5000 with the Pr(x|y) probabilities above. We draw N = 5000 points
for each dataset. We calculate the Bayesian optimal posterior from the generating parameters and average
results across 100 datasets.

15

References
Himan Abdollahpouri, Zahra Nazari, Alex Gain, Clay Gibson, Maria Dimakopoulou, Jesse Anderton, Benjamin Carterette, Mounia Lalmas, and Tony Jebara. Calibrated recommendations as a minimum-cost flow
problem. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’23, page 571–579, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
9781450394079. doi: 10.1145/3539597.3570402. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3539597.3570402.
Dzifa Adjaye-Gbewonyo, Robert A Bednarczyk, Robert L Davis, and Saad B Omer. Using the bayesian
improved surname geocoding method (bisg) to create a working classification of race and ethnicity in a
diverse managed care population: A validation study. Health services research, 49(1):268–283, 2014.
McKane Andrus, Elena Spitzer, Jeffrey Brown, and Alice Xiang. What we can’t measure, we can’t understand: Challenges to demographic data procurement in the pursuit of fairness. In Proceedings of the 2021
ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pages 249–260, 2021.
Stephen Ansolabehere and Eitan Hersh. Gender, race, age, and voting: A research note. In APSA 2011
Annual Meeting Paper, 2011.
Stephen Ansolabehere and Eitan Hersh. Validation: What big data reveal about survey misreporting and
the real electorate. Political Analysis, 20(4):437–459, 2012.
Arthur P Baines and Marsha J Courchane.
Fair lending:
Implications for the indirect
auto finance market, Nov 2014.
URL https://www.crai.com/insights-events/publications/
fair-lending-implications-indirect-auto-finance-market/.
Sidhika Balachandar, Nikhil Garg, and Emma Pierson. Domain constraints improve risk prediction when
outcome data is missing. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Michael Barber and John B Holbein. 400 million voting records show profound racial and geographic
disparities in voter turnout in the united states. PLOS ONE, 17(6):e0268134, 2022.
Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and John Whaley. Auditing saliency cropping algorithms. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pages 4051–4059,
January 2022.
Emily Black, Rakshit Naidu, Rayid Ghani, Kit Rodolfa, Daniel Ho, and Hoda Heidari. Toward operationalizing pipeline-aware ml fairness: a research agenda for developing practical guidelines and tools. In
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, pages 1–11, 2023.
William Cai, Johann Gaebler, Nikhil Garg, and Sharad Goel. Fair allocation through selective information
acquisition. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pages 22–28, 2020.
Simon Caton and Christian Haas. Fairness in machine learning: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 2020.
Irene Chen, Fredrik D Johansson, and David Sontag. Why is my classifier discriminatory? Advances in
neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jiahao Chen, Nathan Kallus, Xiaojie Mao, Geoffry Svacha, and Madeleine Udell. Fairness under unawareness:
Assessing disparity when protected class is unobserved. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* ’19, page 339–348, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450361255. doi: 10.1145/3287560.3287594. URL https://doi.org/
10.1145/3287560.3287594.
Matthew K Chin, Lan N Ðoàn, Rienna G Russo, Timothy Roberts, Sonia Persaud, Emily Huang, Lauren
Fu, Kiran Y Kui, Simona C Kwon, and Stella S Yi. Methods for retrospectively improving race/ethnicity
data quality: A scoping review. Epidemiologic Reviews, page mxad002, 2023.

16

Rajashekar Chintalapati, Suriyan Laohaprapanon, and Gaurav Sood. Predicting race and ethnicity from the
sequence of characters in a name, 2023.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Using publicly available information to proxy for unidentified race
and ethnicity: A methodology and assessment. Washington, DC: CFPB, Summer, 2014.
Sasha Costanza-Chock, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Joy Buolamwini. Who audits the auditors? recommendations from a field scan of the algorithmic auditing ecosystem. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 1571–1583, 2022.
Ari Decter-Frain. How should we proxy for race/ethnicity? comparing bayesian improved surname geocoding
to machine learning methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14583, 2022.
Ari Decter-Frain, Pratik Sachdeva, Loren Collingwood, Hikari Murayama, Juandalyn Burke, Matt Barreto,
Scott Henderson, Spencer Wood, and Joshua Zingher. Comparing methods for estimating demographics
in racially polarized voting analyses. Sociological Methods & Research, page 00491241231192383, 2022.
Kevin DeLuca and John A. Curiel. Validating the applicability of bayesian inference with surname and
geocoding to congressional redistricting. Political Analysis, pages 1–7, 2022.
Rebecca Diamond, Tim McQuade, and Franklin Qian. The effects of rent control expansion on tenants,
landlords, and inequality: Evidence from san francisco. American Economic Review, 109(9):3365–3394,
2019.
Steven Diamond and Stephen Boyd. CVXPY: A Python-embedded modeling language for convex optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(83):1–5, 2016.
Frank Edwards, Hedwig Lee, and Michael Esposito. Risk of being killed by police use of force in the united
states by age, race–ethnicity, and sex. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 116(34):16793–
16798, 2019.
Marc N Elliott, Peter A Morrison, Allen Fremont, Daniel F McCaffrey, Philip Pantoja, and Nicole Lurie.
Using the census bureau’s surname list to improve estimates of race/ethnicity and associated disparities.
Health Services and Outcomes Research Methodology, 9:69–83, 2009.
Kevin Fiscella and Allen M Fremont. Use of geocoding and surname analysis to estimate race and ethnicity.
Health services research, 41(4p1):1482–1500, 2006.
Bernard Fraga, Yamil Velez, and Emily West. Reversion to the mean, or their version of the dream? an
analysis of latino voting in 2020, 2023.
Bernard L Fraga. Candidates or districts? reevaluating the role of race in voter turnout. American Journal
of Political Science, 60(1):97–122, 2016a.
Bernard L Fraga. Redistricting and the causal impact of race on voter turnout. The Journal of Politics, 78
(1):19–34, 2016b.
Bernard L Fraga. The turnout gap: Race, ethnicity, and political inequality in a diversifying America.
Cambridge University Press, 2018.
Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and James Zou. Word embeddings quantify 100 years of
gender and ethnic stereotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(16):E3635–E3644,
2018.
Nikhil Garg, Hannah Li, and Faidra Monachou. Standardized tests and affirmative action: The role of bias
and variance. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
pages 261–261, 2021.
Yair Ghitza and Andrew Gelman. Voter registration databases and mrp: Toward the use of large-scale
databases in public opinion research. Political Analysis, 28(4):507–531, 2020.
17

Avijit Ghosh, Ritam Dutt, and Christo Wilson. When fair ranking meets uncertain inference. In Proceedings
of the 44th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval,
pages 1033–1043, 2021.
Philip Greengard and Andrew Gelman. Replication Data for: BISG: When inferring race or ethnicity, does
it matter that people often live near their relatives?, 2023. URL https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/QIM4UF.
Philip Greengard and Andrew Gelman. An improved bisg for inferring race from surname and geolocation,
2024.
Jacob M Grumbach and Alexander Sahn. Race and representation in campaign finance. American Political
Science Review, 114(1):206–221, 2020.
Wenshuo Guo, Karl Krauth, Michael Jordan, and Nikhil Garg. The stereotyping problem in collaboratively
filtered recommender systems. In Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, pages
1–10, 2021.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, 2023. URL https://www.gurobi.com.
Melissa Hall, Laurens van der Maaten, Laura Gustafson, Maxwell Jones, and Aaron Adcock. A systematic
study of bias amplification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11706, 2022.
Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Andrew Smart, and Jamila Smith-Loud. Towards a critical race methodology in
algorithmic fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency,
pages 501–512, 2020.
Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Kate Saenko, Trevor Darrell, and Anna Rohrbach. Women also snowboard: Overcoming bias in captioning models. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer
vision (ECCV), pages 771–787, 2018.
Eitan D Hersh. Hacking the electorate: How campaigns perceive voters. Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Eitan D Hersh and Clayton Nall. The primacy of race in the geography of income-based voting: New evidence
from public voting records. American Journal of Political Science, 60(2):289–303, 2016.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text degeneration, 2020.
Kosuke Imai, Santiago Olivella, and Evan TR Rosenman. Addressing census data problems in race imputation
via fully bayesian improved surname geocoding and name supplements. Science Advances, 8(49):eadc9824,
2022.
Abigail Z Jacobs and Hanna Wallach. Measurement and fairness. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference
on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pages 375–385, 2021.
Meena Jagadeesan, Nikhil Garg, and Jacob Steinhardt. Supply-side equilibria in recommender systems. In
Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023a. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=eqyhjLG5Nr.
Meena Jagadeesan, Michael I Jordan, Jacob Steinhardt, and Nika Haghtalab. Improved bayes risk can yield
reduced social welfare under competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14670, 2023b.
Vaishali Jain, Ted Enamorado, and Cynthia Rudin. The importance of being ernest, ekundayo, or eswari:
an interpretable machine learning approach to name-based ethnicity classification. 2022.
Shengyu Jia, Tao Meng, Jieyu Zhao, and Kai-Wei Chang. Mitigating gender bias amplification in distribution
by posterior regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06251, 2020.
Nathan Kallus, Xiaojie Mao, and Angela Zhou. Assessing algorithmic fairness with unobserved protected
class using data combination. Management Science, 68(3):1959–1981, 2022.

18

Tina J Kauh, Jen’nan Ghazal Read, and AJ Scheitler. The critical role of racial/ethnic data disaggregation
for health equity. Population research and policy review, 40:1–7, 2021.
Jinhyuk Lee, Hyunjae Kim, Miyoung Ko, Donghee Choi, Jaehoon Choi, and Jaewoo Kang. Name nationality
classification with recurrent neural networks. In IJCAI, volume 17, pages 2081–2087, 2017.
Klas Leino, Matt Fredrikson, Emily Black, Shayak Sen, and Anupam Datta. Feature-wise bias amplification.
In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Zhi Liu and Nikhil Garg. Test-optional policies: Overcoming strategic behavior and informational gaps.
Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, pages 1–13, 2021.
Masoud Mansoury, Himan Abdollahpouri, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Bamshad Mobasher, and Robin Burke. Feedback loop and bias amplification in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM international
conference on information & knowledge management, pages 2145–2148, 2020.
Cory McCartan, Jacob Goldin, Daniel E Ho, and Kosuke Imai. Estimating racial disparities when race is
not observed. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.02580, 2023.
Rajiv Movva, Divya Shanmugam, Kaihua Hou, Priya Pathak, John Guttag, Nikhil Garg, and Emma Pierson.
Coarse race data conceals disparities in clinical risk score performance. Machine Learning for Healthcare
(ML4HC), 2023.
Arvind Narayanan.
Argmax bias, 2021.
1399348241142104064. @random_walker.

URL https://twitter.com/random_walker/status/

Alejandro Noriega-Campero, Michiel A. Bakker, Bernardo Garcia-Bulle, and Alex ’Sandy’ Pentland. Active fairness in algorithmic decision making. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
Ethics, and Society, AIES ’19, page 77–83, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450363242. doi: 10.1145/3306618.3314277. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.
3314277.
Kenny Peng, Manish Raghavan, Emma Pierson, Jon Kleinberg, and Nikhil Garg. Reconciling the accuracydiversity trade-off in recommendations. In The Web Conference, 2024.
Emma Pierson, Camelia Simoiu, Jan Overgoor, Sam Corbett-Davies, Daniel Jenson, Amy Shoemaker, Vignesh Ramachandran, Phoebe Barghouty, Cheryl Phillips, Ravi Shroff, et al. A large-scale analysis of racial
disparities in police stops across the united states. Nature human behaviour, 4(7):736–745, 2020.
Jen’nan Ghazal Read, Scott M Lynch, and Jessica S West. Disaggregating heterogeneity among non-hispanic
whites: Evidence and implications for us racial/ethnic health disparities. Population research and policy
review, 40:9–31, 2021.
Sinan Seymen, Himan Abdollahpouri, and Edward C. Malthouse. A constrained optimization approach
for calibrated recommendations. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems,
RecSys ’21, page 607–612, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
9781450384582. doi: 10.1145/3460231.3478857. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3460231.3478857.
Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A. Smith, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Evaluating gender bias in machine translation. In
Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluís Màrquez, editors, Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1679–1684, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for
Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1164. URL https://aclanthology.org/P19-1164.
Harald Steck. Calibrated recommendations. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference on recommender
systems, pages 154–162, 2018.
Rohan Taori and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Data feedback loops: Model-driven amplification of dataset biases.
In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan
Scarlett, editors, Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 33883–33920. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v202/taori23a.html.
19

Targetsmart, Sep 2022. URL https://targetsmart.com/the-targetsmart-voter-registration-dashboard/.
Brian L Trippe, Buwei Huang, Erika A DeBenedictis, Brian Coventry, Nicholas Bhattacharya, Kevin K Yang,
David Baker, and Lorin Crawford. Randomized gates eliminate bias in sort-seq assays. Protein Science,
31(9):e4401, 2022.
Ioan Voicu. Using first name information to improve race and ethnicity classification. Statistics and Public
Policy, 5(1):1–13, 2018.
Angelina Wang and Olga Russakovsky. Directional bias amplification. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 10882–10893. PMLR, 2021.
Angelina Wang, Vikram V Ramaswamy, and Olga Russakovsky. Towards intersectionality in machine learning: Including more identities, handling underrepresentation, and performing evaluation. In Proceedings
of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 336–349, 2022.
Kyra Yee, Uthaipon Tantipongpipat, and Shubhanshu Mishra. Image cropping on twitter: Fairness metrics,
their limitations, and the importance of representation, design, and agency. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput.
Interact., 5(CSCW2), oct 2021. doi: 10.1145/3479594. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3479594.
Yan Zhang. Assessing fair lending risks using race/ethnicity proxies. Management Science, 64(1):178–197,
2018.
Dora Zhao, Jerone Andrews, and Alice Xiang. Men also do laundry: Multi-attribute bias amplification. In
Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan
Scarlett, editors, Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 42000–42017. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v202/zhao23a.html.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Ordonez, and Kai-Wei Chang. Men also like shopping:
Reducing gender bias amplification using corpus-level constraints. In Martha Palmer, Rebecca Hwa, and
Sebastian Riedel, editors, Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 2979–2989, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1323. URL https://aclanthology.org/D17-1323.

20

A

Extended Related Work

While we focus on demographic imputation as our primary application, the observation that algorithmic
systems tend to amplify the most likely class has reappeared with different names across computational
fields several times, with several proposed solutions. To this literature, we contribute an analysis of how
different discretization approaches have different error properties, suggesting the use of optimization-based
approaches tuned to one’s specific desiderata.

A.1

Argmax bias, calibration, and bias amplification across fields

Our work generally connects to work within algorithmic fairness and related fields. For example, if each class
y represents a (demographic) group, then distributional fidelity could represent a group fairness notion, with
1
for all y, or corresponding to the class probabilities pref (y) = Pr(y).
pref (y) = K
Yee et al. [2021] term “argmax bias” and study whether it affects image cropping algorithms used by
Twitter (prioritizing male faces in image previews). In image labeling tasks, Zhao et al. [2017] find that
standard algorithms tend to over-label an agent as a woman when they are cooking in an image, with similar
gender “bias amplification” occurring for other verbs such as shopping and coaching. For example, Zhao
et al. [2017] find that when the fraction of training set images that are of women cooking Pr(women) is
greater than that of men cooking, the fraction of times an image labeler labels a person who is cooking as a
woman is even greater, Pr(ŷi = women) > Pr(women). Others then refine and expand on such bias [Wang
and Russakovsky, 2021]. Similarly, Stanovsky et al. [2019] find that standard machine translation algorithms
amplify gender stereotypes (e.g., assign a gender-neutral doctor as man when translating to a language with
gendered nouns). In recommendation systems, Steck [2018] proposes the notion of “calibration,” to counter
the phenomenon that a user who prefers horror movies 70% of the time and comedy movies 30% of the time
would only be recommended horror movies (this same notion of calibration is also present in algorithmic
fairness settings). In biological engineering, deterministic binning of measured fluorescence systematically
biases population estimates [Trippe et al., 2022]. The fundamental phenomenon across settings is that absent
sufficient context-specific information for a specific data point, learning systems that optimize for accuracy
will default to the globally most likely outcome. Many papers study related biases in the various contexts
[Birhane et al., 2022, Costanza-Chock et al., 2022, Garg et al., 2018, 2021, Guo et al., 2021, Hall et al., 2022,
Jacobs and Wallach, 2021, Jagadeesan et al., 2023a,b, Jia et al., 2020, Mansoury et al., 2020, Peng et al.,
2024, Taori and Hashimoto, 2023, Zhao et al., 2023]; see also Arvind Narayanan’s summary in a Twitter
thread [Narayanan, 2021] on argmax bias.
Given this widespread identification of the problem (and more generally, a focus on the algorithmic
fairness notion of group fairness), there has been a large literature studying its causes and proposing a range
of solutions.
The role of the continuous model q. The predominant focus in algorithmic fairness, like in demographic
imputation, has been on the continuous predictive model q(y, x) ≈ Pr(Y |X) and its inputs [Black et al.,
2023]. The predictive model itself can be biased, i.e., for the argmax class z, we have that q(z, x) > Pr(Y =
z|X = x). Leino et al. [2019] show that bias amplification in the continuous modeling stage can be caused by
inductive biases of stochastic gradient descent; they propose feature selection pre-processing as a solution.
More generally, a large literature in fair machine learning aims to change continuous predictions q(y, x)
[Caton and Haas, 2020], such as by constrained optimization approaches during training (in-processing) or
resampling training data (pre-processing). Chen et al. [2018] argue that “unfairness induced by inadequate
samples sizes or unmeasured predictive variables should be addressed through data collection, rather than by
constraining the model,” and Cai et al. [2020] and Noriega-Campero et al. [2019] propose active information
acquisition approaches to counter unfairness.
The role of discrete decision-making. Bias amplification can also occur in the discrete decision-making
stage, as the term argmax bias [Yee et al., 2021] suggests – as discussed above, even if the predictive model
is optimal, i.e., q(y, x) = Pr(Y |X), argmax discretization can amplify the most common class. Recognizing
this cause, another set of technical approaches is to instead intervene at the decision point, when going from
a continuous score q(y|x) to a discrete label or decision ŷ. 15
15 We note that there are also non-technical solutions. One especially relevant approach highlighted in the context of argmax
bias is to delay algorithmic decisions or delegate to a human: if the problem is caused by discretizing continuous probabilities

21

We distinguish these technical solutions into two classes, independent and joint.
Independent decision-making The first approach class is to change the mapping from q(y, xi ) to ŷi ,
independently for each data point i. By far the most commonly proposed technical fix in the algorithmic
fairness community at the decision point is to sample decisions – for each data point x, probabilistically
assign it a decision y as a function of the continuous score q(y, x). This approach can eliminate argmax
bias – each class occurs in the correct proportions – but there may be substantial inaccuracy: a class
with a posterior probability of only 10% would be the assigned decision for about 10% of the data points.
Sampling is proposed prominently in the Twitter image cropping work that termed argmax bias [Yee et al.,
2021], and is also proposed as a solution to such biases by Narayanan [2021], in natural language processing
[Hendricks et al., 2018], biological engineering [Trippe et al., 2022], in admission settings with heterogeneous
information [Liu and Garg, 2021], and algorithmic fairness generally [Caton and Haas, 2020].
Despite sampling’s popularity, there is a sense it is inadequate. As Noriega-Campero et al. [2019] highlight
when proposing an information acquisition approach in algorithmic fairness,
“Recent work has proposed optimal post-processing methods that randomize classification decisions
for a fraction of individuals, to achieve fairness measures related to parity in errors and calibration.
These methods, however, have raised concern due to the information inefficiency, intra-group
unfairness, and Pareto sub-optimality”
Another independent approach involves setting fixed thresholds and only discretizing a data point if the
class probability is sufficiently high; if a data point does not meet any threshold, it is excluded [AdjayeGbewonyo et al., 2014, Chen et al., 2019, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2014, Zhang, 2018]. This
approach is often used for demographic imputation; Adjaye-Gbewonyo et al. [2014] pick different thresholds
per group in a health care context.
Joint decision-making An alternative approach is to jointly make decisions across the entire dataset.
Seymen et al. [2021] (for calibrated recommendations) and Zhao et al. [2017] (to reduce bias amplification
in NLP) formulate similar integer optimization problems that jointly take scores {q(y, xi )} and output
labels that balance maximizing individual-level accuracy and matching a class distribution. Abdollahpouri
et al. [2023] formulate the extreme case of prioritizing matching the class distribution as an efficient max
flow problem. As opposed to sampling approaches (and independent approaches more generally), joint
decision-making is rarely even mentioned as a solution to argmax bias or in algorithmic fairness broadly –
for example, it does not appear in a table of six solutions by Yee et al. [2021], or as a solution approach in a
survey of fair machine learning [Caton and Haas, 2020], though sampling and thresholding approaches are
extensively detailed.
Our contribution to this literature. What does our work contribute to this extensive literature? (1)
We analyze decision-making bias as distinct from and in relation to predictive modeling biases, requiring
decision-making interventions: decision-making bias amplification occurs even with Bayes optimal, unbiased
predictive modeling unless predictions are perfect (Pr(Y = y | X = x) = 1 for the true class y, for each
x). Thus, improving continuous predictions such as via active information acquisition is useful – improving
accuracy reduces (worst case) bias when using the argmax decision rule – but it is generally insufficient.
(2) Within the set of decision-making interventions, our work suggests a substantial departure from the
algorithmic fairness status quo away from sampling based approach, and we suggest that optimization based
approaches are relatively underused. More generally, we urge distinguishing between predictive modeling
and decision-making biases in both auditing and bias mitigation, and urge more intentional choice of the
Pr(Y |X) into discrete decisions ŷ, then it can be avoided by not making discrete decisions. In the Twitter image cropping case,
for example, a proposed solution was to allow users to manually crop images for previews [Yee et al., 2021]. As Narayanan
[2021] summarizes in the twitter thread:
“I don’t know any effective technical fixes for the argmax issue. But a really good approach for handling model
uncertainty is to show the user the possible outputs and ask them to choose. But this goes against the mantra of
frictionless design and so it’s very rarely deployed.”
When possible, we believe that such an approach is effective and appropriate, as emphasized by Yee et al. [2021]. However, we
also believe that technical interventions at the point of decision-making under uncertainty are often necessary, and so should
be improved.

22

discretization procedure: discretization is ultimately a highly context dependent decision, for which tradeoffs
such as importance of accuracy, bias, computational scalability, other metrics, and non-quantitative concerns
should be considered.

A.2

Demographic imputation

Individual-level race and ethnicity data are used across applications, including public health, algorithmic
fairness, political science, criminal justice, and economics – especially for disparity auditing [Chen et al.,
2019, Chin et al., 2023, DeLuca and Curiel, 2022, Diamond et al., 2019, Garg et al., 2018, Ghosh et al., 2021,
Grumbach and Sahn, 2020, Pierson et al., 2020]. However, collecting ground truth self-reported data may
face practical or legal barriers [Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2014]. As a result, several methods
have been developed to impute race/ethnicity using proxy variables, often name and geographic location
[Chintalapati et al., 2023, Elliott et al., 2009, Fiscella and Fremont, 2006, Imai et al., 2022, Voicu, 2018].
For example, Bayesian Improved Surname Geocoding (BISG) [Elliott et al., 2009], a widely used method,
was developed to estimate and assess racial disparities. Notably, the US Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau uses BISG as a proxy to detect discriminatory lending practices, as creditors are generally prohibited
from collecting race and ethnicity information [Andrus et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2019, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, 2014]. By and large, these demographic prediction methods are probabilistic classifiers
that first produce continuous predictions; then, these continuous scores are discretized, either through an
argmax rule or approximately so (as we verify in our commercial voter file), with probability thresholds
[Adjaye-Gbewonyo et al., 2014, Chen et al., 2019, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2014, Diamond
et al., 2019].
Our empirical case study is in the context of voter registration data files, which form a backbone of
public opinion and political science research for both academic and electoral ends; see Ghitza and Gelman
[2020] for an overview. Since not every US state makes public individual-level self-reported race/ethnicity
information, commercially sold datasets come with predicted demographic data for each registered voter,
generated through proprietary models [Ansolabehere and Hersh, 2012]; these imputed demographic data are
often provided both as continuous probabilities and discrete single labels [Ghitza and Gelman, 2020].
Many academic analyses (and from our experience, political campaign practitioners) use a voter file’s
discrete race and ethnicity labels [Fraga, 2016a,b, Hersh and Nall, 2016]. Similarly, many academic papers
beyond voter file analyses use discrete labels, instead of continuous probability scores [Adjaye-Gbewonyo
et al., 2014, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2014, Diamond et al., 2019, Ghosh et al., 2021, Grumbach
and Sahn, 2020, Pierson et al., 2020, Zhang, 2018]. We note that discretization is not strictly necessary in
all applications; Chen et al. [2019] and McCartan et al. [2023] present methods that utilize probabilistic
outputs for disparity estimation, and DeLuca and Curiel [2022] sum probabilities directly when estimating
the overall makeup of a population.
Our contribution to this literature. Our empirical results in Section 2 show that the discretization process
(typically argmax or closely related threshold rules) leads to substantial bias in a commonly used commercial
voter file, leading to a severe undercounting of voters of color – on top of the undercounting caused by
continuous model miscalibration. We further find that a joint decision-making approach can eliminate
discretization bias with negligible loss in individual-level accuracy. We thus caution against the use of existing
discrete labels for sensitive applications where such bias would affect results. Instead, we recommend that
(a) data vendors produce discretized labels using a joint decision-making approach, as we do; (b) when
possible, consumers of voter files directly use the continuous scores instead of single discrete labels [Chen
et al., 2019, DeLuca and Curiel, 2022, McCartan et al., 2023], or reconsider the use of imputed demographic
data altogether.

23

B

Theoretical analysis

B.1

Proofs

Recall that a classifier q is calibrated when its continuous predictions are correct on average, Pr(Y =
y|q(y, x) = c) = c.16 Calibration implies Bayesian consistency, i.e., the continuous model cumulatively
assigns the proper mass to each class y: EX [q(y, x)] = Pr(y).
Theorem 1. Argmax bias depends on predictive uncertainty, i.e., how much information features x provide
about the true class label. Consider calibrated classifier q and the argmax decision rule Dargmax . Let N > K
and consider a reference distribution of either the aggregate posterior or the prior. Then,
(i). Suppose x provides no information and q(y, x) = Pr(y) for all x, y. Then, amplification bias is
maximized and all data points are classified as a plurality class:
(
1 − Pr(y), if y = arg maxw p(w),
BIAS(y, Dargmax ) =
− Pr(y),
otherwise.
(
1,
(ii). Suppose the classifier is perfect, i.e., ∀(x, y) ∼ FXY , we have q(z, x) =
0,
is no amplification bias, BIAS(y, Dargmax ) = 0.

if z = y,
Then, there
otherwise.

(iii). More generally, in the intermediate regime, argmax bias is upper bounded by the predictive error of
the classifier q:
BIAS(y, Dargmax ) ≤ MAE(q).

(4)

The bound is tight: there exist FXY and q such that Equation (4) holds with equality for the plurality
class.
Proof. Proof for Part (i). The result immediately follows by definition of argmax. For the argmax class
z, all points are classified to it and so p̂marg (·, z) = 1, and so bias(z, ·, ·) = 1 − pref (z) for any {xi }.
Proof for Part (ii). Similarly, the result immediately follows from the definition of the aggregate posterior
or the prior. Due to perfect prediction, we have that E [p̂marg (·, y)] = Pr(y), for all y. With a consistent
classifier (implied by our notion of calibration), we have that
#
"
1 X
q(y, xi ) = Pr(y).
E[pagg (y, {xi })] ≜ E
N i
Proof for Part (iii). The intermediate regime proof is more involved. For any continuous classifier q,
denote the sets Sa , Sb , Sc , Sd , Se ⊆ X as


Sa if q(z, x) = 1,



1


S
 b if q(z, x) ∈ ( K , 1)
1
x ∈ Sc if q(z, x) = K
,


1

S
if
q(z,
x)
∈
(0,

d
K)


S if q(z, x) = 0
e
with probability mass ℓ ≜
a + b + c + d + e = 1.

R
x∈Xℓ

16 For all c of non-zero measure: ∀c ∈

f (x)dx. Since the sets partition the entire probability space, we have

n
o
R
c : (x,y) I[q(y, x) = c]f (x, y)d(y, x) > 0 .

24

For any class y, its amplification bias bias(y) is maximized when the most data points have y has its
decision, and so we suppose the argmax decision rule breaks ties in favor of z, i.e., the decision rule outputs
z when q(z, x) ≥ q(y ′ , x) for all y ′ ∈ Y.
We start with an example such that Equation (4) holds with equality. Consider q such that
1
, for all y. For x ∈ Se , assume
b, d = 0. Further suppose that for x ∈ Sc , we further have that q(y, x) = K
′
′
that there exists another class y ̸= z such that q(y , x) = 1.
Recall that, by assumption, q is consistent, i.e.,
Z
Z
Z
1
p(z) = EX [q(z, x)] =
f (x)dx +
1f (x)dx +
0f (x)dx
(5)
x∈Sa
x∈Se
x∈Sc K
c
(6)
=a+ .
K
The key step is realizing that the calibration requirement on q gives us a bound for MAE, and relates
bias to classifier accuracy. Recall that calibration means that
EXY [Y = y|q(y, x) = δ] = δ

(7)

1
.
which implies that EXYR [Y = z|x ∈ Sa ] = 1, andR EXYP
[Y = z|x ∈ Se ] = 0, and EXY [YR = z|x ∈ Sc ] = K
Equivalently, that x∈Sa f (x, z) = a and x∈Sa y̸=z f (x, y) = 0. Similarly, x∈Se f (x, z) = 0, and
R
f (x, z) = Kc .
x∈Sc
Then, we have
Z X
MAE =
f (x, y)|1 − q(y, x)|dx
(8)
x y∈Y





Z
[f (x, z)|1 − q(z, x)|] + 

=
x


X

f (x, y)|1 − q(y, x)| dx

(9)

y̸=z





Z
=

[f (x, z)0] + 
x∈Sa


X





Z
[f (x, z)1] + 

+

f (x, y)1

defns of Sℓ

(10)

y̸=z

x∈Se


X



f (x, y)1 + [f (x, y ′ )0]

(11)

′}
y ∈{z,y
/






X
K − 1 
 f (x, z) K − 1 + 
+
f (x, y)
K
K
x∈Sc
y̸=z


K −1
=0 + 0 + c
K
Z

(12)

calibration implications

(13)

Note that argmax (breaking ties in favor of z) assigns label z for all x ∈ Sa , Sc . Thus, we have
pargmax (z) = a + c.

(14)

Putting things together, we have
bias(z) = pargmax (z) − p(z)
c
K −1
= a + c − (a + ) = c
K
K
= MAE.
Proof that the above is also an upper bound in Equation (4), that that is the worst case
example. Now we prove that this bound is the worst case for any calibrated (and thus consistent) q0 . The
25

framework for the proof is, for any given setting (joint distribution F0 , calibrated and consistent q0 ) and
fixed class z, to transform the setting into the worst-case example above, where each transformation: (a)
maintains the original marginal distribution Pr(y) of F ; (b) either maintains or increases the mass of points
x assigned to class z (and thus either maintaining or increasing bias); and (c) does not increase MAE. Then,
since the worst-case example satisfies the inequality, we have shown that the original example does as well.
Our proof below is notationally simpler with continuous x ∈ X , such that there is no point mass (F ({x}) =
0, for all x). Thus, for discrete X , we first transform it by adding a continuous feature dimension, where
the corresponding feature xnew dimension ∈ [0, 1] is distributed uniform at random, independent of the other
features and y.
Recall that we assume that ties are broken consistently, with some ordering over the classes y ∈ Y. Thus,
we can consider the class z such that any ties with any other class are broken in its favor: this class has the
worst-case bias; for example for F0 , q0 such that another class exhibits more bias, we can relabel the points
(and so MAE is fixed) such that z has the largest bias, at least as large as the original example. Thus,
proving the result for z is sufficient.
We start with the case for K = 2, i.e., binary decision-making, and then show how the proof extends
1
, 1)), we can transform the example such that x
generally. The idea is that for any x ∈ Sb (i.e., q0 (z, x) ∈ ( K
becomes in either Sa or Sc while maintaining the original class distribution Pr(y) and the fraction of points
discretized to z, and preserving MAE. Similarly, for any x ∈ Sd , we can move x to either Sc or Se while
maintaining consistency, increasing bias, and preserving MAE.
Step 1: Suppose mass b of Sb is positive, b > 0. Then, we move a set Sb→a to Sa and a set Sb→c to Sc ,
respectively, maintaining consistency, where Sb→a , Sb→c are a partition of Sb . In the binary example, we
know that all x are still discretized to z, since q(z, x)R > 1/2 (and will remain so), and so pargmax is fixed.
Recall that consistency requires p(z) = EX [q(z, x)] = x∈X q(z, x)f (x)dx. We can choose sets Sb→a , Sb→c to
maintain consistency and the class distribution of z by satisfying the following:
Z
Z
Z
1
q0 (z, x)f (x)dx =
1f (x)dx +
f (x)dx
(15)
K
x∈Sb
x∈S
x∈S
Z
Z
Z b→a
Z b→c
1
⇐⇒
q0 (z, x)f (x)dx +
q0 (z, x)f (x)dx =
1f (x)dx +
f (x)dx
(16)
x∈Sb→a
x∈Sb→c
x∈S
x∈Sb→c K
Z
Z b→a
1
⇐⇒
(q0 (z, x) − )f (x)dx =
(1 − q0 (z, x))f (x)dx
(17)
K
x∈Sb→c
x∈Sb→a
Note that such sets exist because F0 is a continuous distribution in X , and so expanding the set Sb→c
monotonically and continuously increases the left-hand side, while monotonically and continuously decreasing
the right-hand side.
Next, we claim that this transformation preserves MAE. As we used in Equation (13), calibration
implies that the transformed error MAE
P 1 Rwithin the subset Sb→a is 0, and MAE1 within the subset Sb→c is
F (Sb→c ) K−1
.
Recall
that
MAE
=
y∈Y x∈X f (x, y)(1 − q(y, x))dx. Then,
K
MAE1 − MAE0
X Z
=
y∈Y

(18)

  Z

1
f (x, y) (1 − ) − (1 − q0 (y, x)) dx +
f (x, y) [(1 − 1) − (1 − q0 (y, x))] dx
K
Sb→c
Sb→a
(19)

=

X Z
y∈Y


  Z

1
f (x, y) q0 (y, x) −
dx −
f (x, y) [1 − q0 (y, x)] dx
K
Sb→c
Sb→a

=0

(20)
(21)

Where the last line follows from Equation (17) (the sets were chosen to maintain consistency, and this also
maintains MAE). Note that Equation (17) only has this condition for the focal class z, whereas Equation (20)
sums over classes. Note that, in the K = 2 example, maintaining consistency (and class distribution) of
one class automatically maintains it for the other class, and that the sets {x : q(z, x) ∈ (1/K, 1)} and
{x : q(y, x) ∈ (0, 1/K)}, y ̸= z are equivalent.
Thus MAE1 = MAE0 and bias1 = bias0 .
26

Step 2: Similarly, now suppose mass d of Sd is positive, d > 0. Then, we move a set Sd→c to Sc and a
set Sd→e to Se , respectively, maintaining consistency and MAE while increasing bias (in Sd , points are not
discretized to z, but they are in Sd→c under the transformed example).
As in Step 1, choose the sets to maintain consistency and the class distribution of z by:
Z
Z
(q1 (z, x) − 0)f (x)dx =
(1/K − q1 (z, x))f (x)dx
x∈Sd→e

x∈Sd→c

And then we have
MAE2 − MAE1
X Z
=
y∈Y



(22)
 

1
f (x, y) (1 − ) − (1 − q1 (y, x)) dx
K
Sd→c

Z

f (x, y) [(1 − 0) − (1 − q1 (y, x))] dx +

Sd→e

(23)
=

X Z
y∈Y


1
− q1 (y, x) dx
f (x, y)
K
Sd→c

 Z
f (x, y) [q1 (y, x)] dx −

Sd→e





= 0,

(24)
(25)

and so bias2 ≥ bias1 and MAE2 = MAE1 .
Thus, we have
bias0 = bias1 ≤ bias2
= MAE2

Equivalent to example for worst case where showed equality

= MAE1 = MAE0 .
Finally, we must show that the above argument holds for K ≥ 2. For the K = 2 case, the notation is simpler
because transforming q(z, x) also symmetrically transforms q(y, x) for the class y ̸= z, and that the sets
{x : q(z, x) ∈ (1/K, 1)} and {x : q(y, x) ∈ (0, 1/K)} are equivalent. Thus, if x ∈ Sb→c , then, simultaneously,
we were moving q(y, x) from less than 1/2 to exactly 1/2.
This symmetry no longer holds for z and a fixed y ̸= z because these factors depend on other classes as
well (one can increase q(z, x) while holding fixed q(y, x)). However, we show that we can still construct a
sequence of transformations as follows.
While the mass of set Sb is more than zero, note that for each x ∈ Sb , there exists at least one class
y ′ ̸= z such that q(y ′ , x) ∈ (0, 1/K). In the general case, then, we can construct sets Sb→a , Sb→c where we
change
q(z, x) as before while, simultaneously, moving q(y ′ , x) toward 0 or 1/K, to maintain consistency and
P
y q(y, x) = 1 for all x. Note that the corresponding transformations all maintain MAE and bias(z), while
potentially increasing bias(y ′ ). Similarly, while the mass of set Sd is non-zero, there exists at least one class
y ′ ̸= z such that q(y ′ , x) ∈ (1/K, 1), and one can make the parallel transformations.
Thus, for any K, these transformations maintain MAE without decreasing bias, and transform the setting
to the worst-case example F, q, proving the result.
Theorem 2. Consider Bayes optimal q, and N > K. For all F :
(i). For every γ, pref there exists a joint decision-making rule that maximizes Oγ (D, q, pref ) in Equation (3).
(ii). The argmax decision rule Dargmax maximizes O1 (D, q, pref ), i.e., is accuracy maximizing.
(iii). Dargmax is the only Pareto optimal independent decision rule for non-trivial pref ∈ P. No independent
decision rule D maximizes objective Oγ for any γ, unless γ = 1 and D agrees with Dargmax with
probability 1.

27

Proof. Proof for Part (i) The result immediately holds for joint decision-making rules, by construction.
Consider the multi-objective optimization decision rules defined in (1):
!
N
1 X
γ
q(ŷi , xi ) + (1 − γ)fid(pref , ŷ1:N ).
D ({q(xi )}, pref ) = arg max{ŷi } γ
N i=1
Now, note that the objective can be decomposed using the tower property, as follows:
γ
ON
(D, q, pref ) = γACCN (D, q) + (1 − γ)FIDN (D, q, pref )


= EF{X} EF{Y }|{X} [γacc(yi , D({q(xi )})) + (1 − γ)fid(pref , D({q(xi )})) | {Xi } = {xi }]
"
"
##
N
1 X
= EF{X} EF{Y }|{X} γ
I [D({q(xi )}) = yi ] + (1 − γ)fid(pref , D({q(xi )})) | {Xi } = {xi }
N i
"
"
##
N
1 X
= EF{X} EF{Y }|{X} γ
q(D({q(xj )})i , xi ) + (1 − γ)fid(pref , D({q(xi )})) | {Xi } = {xi }
N i

Where the last line follows from, given Bayes optimal q, we have for all ŷi
q(ŷi , xi ) = EFY |X [Y = ŷi |X = xi ].
Thus, the optimization decision rule maximizes the inner expectation in the final line, for each given dataset
γ
{xi }. Thus, the corresponding rule maximizes ON
(D, q, pref ), as desired.
Proof for Part (ii)
The result follows directly from the classifier being Bayes optimal – for each row, you cannot do better
than picking the most likely class for that row.
Recall that D({q(xi )}) refers to the set of decisions ŷ1:N with dataset x1:N , where the decisions can be
jointly made across data points. Note that, for the Bayes optimal classifier q ∗ , we have
EFY |X [I [Y = y] | X = x] = q ∗ (y, x)
Thus, we have:
1
ON
(D, q ∗ , ·) = ACCN (D, q ∗ )

(26)
∗

= EF [acc(y1:N , D({q (xi )}))]
#
"
1 X
I [ŷi = y]
= EF
N i

(27)
let ŷi ≜ D({q ∗ (xj )}N
j=1 )i
(28)

"

"

= EF{X} EF{Y }|{X}

##

1 X
I [Yi = ŷi ] | {Xi } = {xi }
N i

tower property
(29)

"
= EF{X}

#

1 X
EFY |X [I [Y = ŷi ] | X = xi ]
N i

independent sampling of datapoints
(30)

"
= EF{X}
"
≤ EF{X}

#

1 X ∗
q (ŷi , xi )
N i

(31)

#
1 X ∗
∗
q (arg max q (y, xi ), xi )
y
N i

(32)

1
≜ ON
(Dargmax , q ∗ , ·).

(33)

28

Proof for Part (iii). The proof for Part (iii) is more involved. Note that both components of the objective
are non-negative, and from Part (i) we have examples of joint decision rules that are optimal for every
data sample {xi }. Thus, to prove that a rule is not Pareto optimal for a given F , it is sufficient to show
there exists a dataset sample {xi } ∼ FX with positive probability for which the rule is not optimal for that
sample. Since we are considering independent rules and a fixed F, q, we will denote D(q(x)) as the decision
for datapoint x for notational simplicity.
Binary setting, K = 2. For clarity of exposition, we first prove the result in detail for a binary
classification setting where y ∈ {0, 1}, and then extend the proof for all K.
Consider independent decision rule D that is not identical to the argmax rule.
Case 1. Non-monotonic or random rules.
If a rule, with positive probability, is such that
q(1, x1 ) > q(1, x2 ) but D(q(x2 )) = 1 and D(q(x1 )) = 0, then it is suboptimal with positive probability.
There exists some D′ where D′ (x) = D(x) for all x except that D(x1 ) = 1 and D(x2 ) = 0. Then the
marginal distribution pmarg remains the same and the expected accuracy of D′ is greater than that of D.
Case 2. Threshold rules Thus, it is sufficient to consider rules with a threshold p, where Dp (q(x)) =
1 if and only if q(1, x) ≥ p, and 0 otherwise. Note that p = 0.5 corresponds to the argmax decision rule. We
now prove that for any other p ̸= 0.5, with positive probability there exists a test sample such that the rule
is suboptimal. Without loss of generality, assume p < .5, and a similar proof holds for p > .5.
By assumption, we have that ∃δ > 0 such that Dp disagrees with the argmax rule with positive probability
δ, i.e., Pr(q(1, x) ∈ (p, .5)) = δ. Then, with probability equal to δ N > 0, we have that the entire data sample
x1:N is such that q(1, xi ) ∈ (p, .5), and so Dp (which has ŷi = 1, ∀i) disagrees with the argmax rule on every
datapoint (which has ŷi = 0, ∀i). By the assumption of non-trivial reference distribution pref ∈ PN , we have
pref (0, {xi }) ≥

1
N

and so we can improve both accuracy and distributional fidelity by switching a decision on at least one point
from ŷi = 1 to ŷi = 0.
Extending argument for all K ≥ 2. Now, we show that the argument holds for any K, for any F, q –
either an independent decision rule D is equivalent to the argmax rule (with probability 1, they make the
same decisions), or it is not on the Pareto curve. The argument is similar to the above, and is as follows.
Consider a class y such that there exists a set X ⊆ X with F (X) > 0 such that, for x ∈ X, the argmax
rule discretizes x to y but the rule D does not: Dargmax (q(x)) = y, but D(q(x)) ̸= y. Such a class y and set
X exists since D is not equivalent to Dargmax .
Now, consider a dataset sample such that, xi ∈ X for all i. This happens with positive probability F (X)N .
For this sample, D disagrees with Dargmax on every data point xi , and note that Dargmax (q(xi )) = y for all
xi . By the assumption of non-trivial reference distribution pref ∈ PN , we have
pref (y, {xi }) ≥

1
,
N

i.e., matching the reference distribution would allocate at least one data point to y. Thus, we can improve
both accuracy and fidelity to the reference distribution by switching the decision of at least one point to y
(in particular, finding a class y ′ that is over-allocated compared to the reference distribution).

B.2

Simulating the Pareto Curve of Methods

Figure 5 demonstrates Theorem 2 with a simulated, Bayes optimal predictor. Data is generated as described
in Section 5, using σ = 0.5 (MAE = 0.42).

B.3

Simulating Worst-Case Bias

We now draw data according to the worst-case example discussed in the proof of Theorem 1. Figure 6
replicates Figure 4a from the main text, with this alternative synthetic data approach. Note that the bias
of the most common class is equal to MAE, as we prove in Theorem 1. Class 1 corresponds to the plurality
29

0.70

Accuracy

0.68
0.66
0.64
0.62
0.60
0.175

Integer Program
Top-K Nucleus Sampling
Thompson Sampling
Argmax
Aggregate Posterior Matching
0.150

0.125

0.100

0.075

Fidelity

0.050

0.025 0.000

Figure 5: In simulation, the performance of various commonly used decision rules. The results illustrate
Theorem 2: the argmax rule maximizes accuracy, but is the only Pareto optimal independent rule. Simulation
details and decision rules are described in Section 5.

Bias (Difference from True Sample)

class z, while the other classes all have equal probability. In the language of our proof, we have e = 0 and
a = 1 − c, and we vary c in the plot.

0.8

Information
c = 0.2, MAE = 0.17
c = 0.4, MAE = 0.33
c = 0.6, MAE = 0.5
c = 0.8, MAE = 0.67
c = 1, MAE = 0.83

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2

1

2

3

4

Class

5

6

Figure 6: Simulated bias for each class for the worst-case example in which bias of the most common class
is equal to the MAE.

C

Additional empirical analyses

C.1

Model calibration

Figure 7 shows the calibration curve of the voter file’s continuous scores, assessed in North Carolina for
individuals for whom self-reported ground truth data is available.

30

Actual Fraction of Population

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

Perfectly calibrated
African-American
Hispanic
Asian
Native American
Caucasian

0.2
0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Mean Predicted Probability

1.0

Figure 7: Calibration plot for the continuous scores in the voter file, assessed using North Carolina individuals
for whom self-reported ground truth data is available. Mathematically, the x axis corresponds to (binned)
q(y, x), and the y axis corresponds to E[Y = y|q(y, x) = c]. Thus, a perfectly calibrated classifier would be
on the y = x line for each group. Note that African-American is fully above the line, meaning that for any
predicted fraction c, a higher proportion of the population is actually African American. Thus, the classifier
is under-predicting the group, leading to even the aggregate posterior under-counting the group in Figure 2a.
Conversely, Caucasian is primarily below the line, indicating that the continuous model is over-predicting
the group.

C.2

Extended Analysis

As described in Section 5, we empirically examine and plot additional discretization methods, such as Top-k
sampling. Results are in Figure 8 and table 2. These methods are also included in our replication analyses
in Appendices C.3 to C.5.

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Threshold at 0.8
Commercial (Argmax)
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching

Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling

0.19
0.18
0.17
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.14
0.16

ican Hispanic

Asian

r
-Ame

n
Africa

n
n
erica Caucasia

e Am

Nativ

Figure 8: Extension of Figure 2a with additional decision-making rules plotted.

31

Threshold at 0.8 (Among 67.9% Not Dropped)
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold Matching Heuristic
County-Conditional Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Top-2 Sampling
Ground Truth Marginal Matching
County-Conditional Ground Truth Marginal Matching

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.928
0.846
0.844
0.841
0.841
0.834
0.776
0.787
0.841
0.840

Fidelity to
Ground Truth
-0.352
-0.079
-0.150
-0.074
-0.074
-0.074
-0.074
-0.081
-0.000
-0.000

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior
-0.293
-0.019
-0.091
-0.000
-0.002
-0.000
-0.000
-0.023
-0.074
-0.074

Table 2: Extension of Table 1 with additional decision-making rules plotted. Note that access to the ground
truth distribution makes bias minimization trivial, while achieving accuracy comparable to the aggregate
posterior.

C.3

Replication on Public Data

We replicate our analysis and results from publicly available data in North Carolina on imputation models
developed by Greengard and Gelman [2024], whose data and code are publicly available for replication
[Greengard and Gelman, 2023]. Their data in North Carolina (N = 4,233,012) uses K = 6 race/ethnicity
categories: (non-Hispanic) Black, American Indian and Alaskan Native (AIAN), Asian and Pacific Islander
(API), White, and Hispanic, with Hispanic encompassing voters of any racial background.
We examine two sets of models and predicted probabilities used by Greengard and Gelman [2024]:
Bayesian Improved Surname Geocoding (BISG) (the standard race prediction algorithm), as well their novel
contribution, a raking-based improved model. Their implementation of BISG uses voter file information.
Figure 9 shows calibration plots for the two models provided; BISG in particular is calibrated for both
White and Black groups. In Figure 10, we observe that argmax bias persists, even when a model may be
well-calibrated. Notably, even when aggregate probabilities may overrepresent Black voters and underrepresent White, argmax discretization still leads to undercounting for the former and overcounting for the
latter. However, because the Raking predictive model comparatively under-predicts White individuals, all
discretization approaches that use the aggregate posterior under-count the White class. Figure 11 shows
that, with more calibrated models, argmax is accuracy-maximizing over joint rules, more closely resembling
the Bayes optimal setting in simulation Figure 5. Lastly, Figure 12 replicates Figure 3.
1.0

Perfectly calibrated
Black
Hispanic
API
AIAN
White
Other

0.8
0.6

Actual Fraction of Population

Actual Fraction of Population

1.0

0.4
0.2
0.0

Perfectly calibrated
Black
Hispanic
API
AIAN
White
Other

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Mean Predicted Probability

1.0

0.0

(a) BISG.

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Mean Predicted Probability

1.0

(b) Raking.

Figure 9: Replicating Figure 7 with the data and predicted probabilities in Greengard and Gelman [2024].

32

Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling

Threshold at 0.8
Argmax
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.200
0.175
0.100

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Threshold at 0.8
Argmax
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.075
0.050
0.025
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.175
0.200

Black

panic

His

API

AIAN

White

r
Othe

Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling

0.16
0.15
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.17
0.18
0.19

Black

nic

Hispa

(a) BISG.

API

White

AIAN

r

Othe

(b) Raking.

Figure 10: Replicating Figure 2a with the data and predicted probabilities in Greengard and Gelman [2024].

0.775

0.77

0.770

0.76

0.765

0.75

0.755

0.710
0.705
0.700
0.695

Accuracy

Accuracy

0.760

Argmax
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Integer Program
Data-Driven Threshold
Top-k Sampling
0.200

0.175

0.150

0.125

0.100

Ground Truth Fidelity

0.74
0.73

Argmax
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Integer Program
Data-Driven Threshold
Top-k Sampling

0.69
0.68
0.075

0.67

0.050

(a) BISG.

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

Ground Truth Fidelity

0.04

(b) Raking.

Figure 11: Replicating Figure 2c with the data and predicted probabilities in Greengard and Gelman [2024].
Note that in Figure 11b, the aggregate posterior is further from the ground truth distribution than the
argmax solution, as the predictive model underrepresents the white majority (see Figure 9b), and so moving
methods that increase fidelity to the Aggregate Posterior actually decrease fidelity to the Ground Truth.

C.4

Replication on other states

We replicate our results (Figures 13 and 14 and table 4 corresponding to Figures 2a and 2c and table 1),
with additional methods displayed, on similarly processed commercial voter file data from South Carolina
(N = 3,494,505) and Florida (N = 13,766,639), which also report self-reported race. For further robustness,
we also replicate on data from all three states joined together (N = 23,635,780), as well as all individuals
across in the United States who have self-reported race/ethnicity data in the commercial file (i.e., including
other states with self-reported race and former residents of NC/SC/FL that have moved elsewhere) (N =
39,685,870).

33

Argmax

Argmax
0.4
0.4

1.0
0.3
0.3

Threshold, 0.8

0.2

Thompson Sampling

0.1

0.6
0.0

Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.4

Thompson Sampling
White Population Bias

Caucasian Population

True Caucasian Population

0.2

0.0

Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.1

County-Conditional Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

White Population Bias

0.8

Threshold at 0.8

County-Conditional Aggregate Posterior Matching
0.3
0.3

0.4
0.4

0.0

(a) White population.

(b) BISG.

(c) Raking.

Figure 12: Replication of Figure 3 using the public data and predictions from Greengard and Gelman [2024].

Threshold at 0.8 (Among 53.4% Not Dropped)
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Argmax
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold Matching Heuristic
Thompson Sampling
Top-2 Sampling
Ground Truth Marginal Matching

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.904
0.765
0.774
0.751
0.756
0.693
0.713
0.759

Fidelity to
Ground Truth
-0.420
-0.048
-0.210
-0.061
-0.049
-0.061
-0.037
-0.000

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior
-0.398
-0.046
-0.213
-0.000
-0.021
-0.001
-0.053
-0.060

Fidelity to
Ground Truth
-0.386
-0.085
-0.082
-0.144
-0.142
-0.144
-0.104
-0.000

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior
-0.450
-0.077
-0.189
-0.000
-0.035
-0.001
-0.079
-0.144

(a) BISG.

Threshold at 0.8 (Among 45.9% Not Dropped)
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Argmax
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold Matching Heuristic
Thompson Sampling
Top-2 Sampling
Ground Truth Marginal Matching

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.913
0.755
0.768
0.730
0.739
0.669
0.698
0.759

(b) Raking.

Table 3: Replicating Table 1 with the data and predicted probabilities in Greengard and Gelman [2024].

C.5

Voter File Results Without Uncoded

We now replicate our results with an alternative data processing choice: dropping the 205,683 entries that
the commercial voter file labels as Uncoded, as opposed to replacing them with the argmax choice, leaving
N = 6,168,953 data points. Table 5 and Figure 15 replicate Table 1 and Figure 2, respectively. Results are

34

Threshold at 0.8 (Among 66.8% Not Dropped)
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold Matching Heuristic
Thompson Sampling
Top-2 Sampling
Ground Truth Marginal Matching

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.926
0.845
0.846
0.838
0.840
0.774
0.784
0.840

Fidelity to
Ground Truth
-0.332
-0.076
-0.130
-0.069
-0.066
-0.070
-0.072
-0.000

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior
-0.283
-0.021
-0.081
-0.000
-0.007
-0.000
-0.020
-0.069

Fidelity to
Ground Truth
-0.335
-0.107
-0.157
-0.112
-0.109
-0.112
-0.126
-0.000

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior
-0.235
-0.022
-0.077
-0.000
-0.005
-0.000
-0.027
-0.112

Fidelity to
Ground Truth
-0.337
-0.098
-0.151
-0.094
-0.083
-0.094
-0.105
-0.000

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior
-0.256
-0.020
-0.076
-0.000
-0.012
-0.000
-0.024
-0.094

(a) South Carolina.

Threshold at 0.8 (Among 70.8% Not Dropped)
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold Matching Heuristic
Thompson Sampling
Top-2 Sampling
Ground Truth Marginal Matching

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.918
0.848
0.847
0.841
0.842
0.778
0.791
0.843

(b) Florida.

Threshold at 0.8 (Among 69.4% Not Dropped)
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold Matching Heuristic
Thompson Sampling
Top-2 Sampling
Ground Truth Marginal Matching

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.921
0.847
0.846
0.842
0.843
0.777
0.789
0.842

(c) North Carolina, South Carolina, and Florida combined.

Threshold at 0.8 (Among 68.8% Not Dropped)
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold Matching Heuristic
Thompson Sampling
Top-2 Sampling
Ground Truth Marginal Matching

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.924
0.850
0.848
0.845
0.845
0.778
0.789
0.845

Fidelity to
Ground Truth
-0.336
-0.097
-0.146
-0.091
-0.094
-0.091
-0.100
-0.000

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior
-0.258
-0.020
-0.068
-0.000
-0.003
-0.000
-0.023
-0.091

(d) All self-reported race data in the commercial voter file across the US.

Table 4: Replicating Table 1 with additional methods and data for other states from the commercial voter
file.

35

Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling

Threshold at 0.8
Commercial (Argmax)
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.18
0.16

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Threshold at 0.8
Commercial (Argmax)
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.14
0.16

ican Hispanic

r
-Ame

n
Africa

Asian

e Am

Nativ

n
n
erica Caucasia

0.18
0.16
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.09
0.10

ican Hispanic

r
-Ame

n
Africa

(a) South Carolina.

Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling

Threshold at 0.8
Commercial (Argmax)
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.18
0.16
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.11
0.12
0.13

ican Hispanic

r
-Ame

n
Africa

Asian

Asian

n
n
erica Caucasia
e Am

Nativ

(b) Florida.

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Threshold at 0.8
Commercial (Argmax)
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching

Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling

e Am

Nativ

n
n
erica Caucasia

0.18
0.16
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.12
0.14

ican Hispanic

r
-Ame

n
Africa

(c) North Carolina, South Carolina, and Florida combined.

Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling

Asian

n
n
erica Caucasia
e Am

Nativ

(d) All self-reported race data in the commercial
voter file across the US.

Figure 13: Replication of Figure 2a with additional methods and data for other states from the commercial
voter file.
qualitatively identical when comparing across decision rules. Note that the undercounting of voters of color
is higher (percentage-wise) after dropping the Uncoded individuals, as these individuals tended to be (both
in self-reported ground truth and imputed argmax) disproportionately voters of color. This follow the smae
intuition seen in simpler threshold rules (e.g. probability at 0.8), where a preference for highly confident
points leads to increased bias.

C.6

Additional Simplex Visualizations

In Figure 16, we provide additional visualizations for decision-making rules as a supplement to the figures
in Figure 1.

36

0.846

0.8475

0.844

0.8450

0.842

0.8425

0.838

Accuracy

Accuracy

0.840

0.7900

0.784

Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Integer Program
Data-Driven Threshold
Top-k Sampling

0.782
0.780
0.778
0.776
0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.09

Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Integer Program
Data-Driven Threshold
Top-k Sampling

0.7875
0.7850
0.7825
0.7800

Ground Truth Fidelity

0.08

0.7775

0.07

0.16

0.15

0.14

(a) South Carolina.

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.11

0.10

0.09

(b) Florida.
0.850

0.846

0.848

0.844

0.846

Accuracy

0.842

Accuracy

0.13

Ground Truth Fidelity

0.788
0.786

Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Integer Program
Data-Driven Threshold
Top-k Sampling

0.784
0.782
0.780
0.778
0.15

0.14

0.13

0.12

0.11

Ground Truth Fidelity

0.790
0.788
0.786

Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Integer Program
Data-Driven Threshold
Top-k Sampling

0.784
0.782
0.780
0.10

0.09

0.778

0.08

(c) North Carolina, South Carolina, and Florida combined.

0.14

0.13

0.12

Ground Truth Fidelity

(d) All self-reported race data in the commercial
voter file across the US.

Figure 14: Replication of Figure 2c with additional methods and data for other states from the commercial
voter file.

0.18
0.16
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06

DC

0.02

HI

NM

0.00

NY
LA

0.02

PA
WI
VT
MI
OH
IA NE
RI CT
MT MN
WVSD KS TN
KY
WA

0.04

0.06

IL
USA
FL
AZ
SC
NC
DE VA

MS

TX

0.8525

CA

0.8500
0.8475

GA

0.8450

Accuracy

Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling

Bias (Difference when Discretized)

Bias (Difference from Voter Population)

Threshold at 0.8
Commercial (Argmax)
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching

0.8425

NV

0.7950
0.7900
0.7875

OK

0.14
0.16

0.10

Afric

n
erica Hispanic
an-Am

Asian

Nativ

e Am

n
erica

asian

Cauc

(a) Replication of Figure 2a

Commercial (Argmax)
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Thompson Sampling
Integer Program
Data-Driven Threshold
Top-k Sampling

0.7925

0.08

0.7850

AK
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Aggregate Posterior Voter of Color Fraction

(b) Replication of Figure 2b

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

Ground Truth Fidelity

0.08

(c) Replication of Figure 2c

Figure 15: Replicating Figure 2 with the Uncoded category removed, N = 6,168,953 registered voters. Note
that in Figure 15b, many states across the board have lower counts for voters of color when data discretized
when the Uncoded category is removed, as such data points tend to be less white than average.

37

Threshold at 0.8 (30.6% Dropped)
Commercial (Argmax)
Thompson Sampling
Aggregate Posterior Matching
Data-Driven Threshold
Integer Program, γ = 0.9
Top-2 Sampling
Ground Truth Marginal Matching

Accuracy with
Ground Truth
0.929
0.852
0.784
0.842
0.844
0.853
0.795
0.844

Fidelity to
Ground Truth Distrib.
-0.341
-0.157
-0.075
-0.076
-0.076
-0.093
-0.080
-0.000

Fidelity to
Aggregate Posterior Distrib.
-0.282
-0.098
-0.000
-0.000
-0.007
-0.034
-0.024
-0.075

Table 5: Replicating Table 1 with Uncoded labels removed as opposed to replaced with the argmax continuous
scores.

(a) Top-2 Sampling, randomized
according to rescaled probabilities.

(b) Integer program, with chosen
parameter γ = 0.9.

(c) Data-driven threshold, approximating matching from Figure 1d.

Figure 16: Extending Figure 1, classified labels onto a 3-dimensional probability simplex for other methods,
with Hispanic, Asian, and Native American probabilities aggregated into Other.

38

